The mechanism of the bainite transformation in steels is reviewed, beginning with a summary
of the early research and finishing with an assessment of the transformation in the context of
the other reactions which occur as austenite is cooled to temperatures where it is no longer the
stable phase. The review includes a detailed account of the microstructure, chemistry, and crystallography
of bainitic ferrite and of the variety of carbide precipitation reactions associated with
the bainite transformation. This is followed by an assessment of the thermodynamic and kinetic
characteristics of the reaction and by a consideration of the reverse transformation from bainite
to austenite. It is argued that there are useful mechanistic distinctions to be made between the
coherent growth of ferrite initially supersaturated with carbon (bainite), coherent growth of
Widmanst~itten ferrite under paraequilibrium conditions, and incoherent growth of ferrite under
local equilibrium or paraequilibrium conditions. The nature of the so-called acicular ferrite is
also discussed.

DURING the late 1920's, in the course of some pioneering
studies on the isothermal transformation of austenite
at temperatures above that at which martensite first
forms, but below that at which fine pearlite is found,
Davenport and Bain tll discovered a new microstructure
consisting of an "acicular, dark etching aggregate," which
was quite unlike the pearlite or martensite observed in
the same steel. They originally called this microstructure
"martensite-troostite," since they believed that it "forms
much in the manner of martensite but is subsequently
more or less tempered and succeeds in precipitating
carbon."
The structure was found to etch more rapidly than
martensite but less so than troostite (fine pearlite). The
appearance of "low-range" martensite-troostite (formed
at temperatures just above Ms) was found to be somewhat
different from the "high-range" martensite-troostite
formed at higher temperatures. The microstructure exhibited
unusual and promising properties; it was found
to be "tougher for the same hardness than tempered martensite
"I21 and was the cause of much excitement at the
newly established United States Steel Corporation Laboratory
in New Jersey. In 1934, the research staff of the
laboratory named the microstructure "Bainite" in honor
of their colleague E.C. Bain, who had inspired the studies,
and presented him with the first ever photomicrograph
of bainite, taken at a magnification of 1000
times. [3.41
The name "bainite" did not immediately catch on. It
H.K.D.H. BHADESHIA, Lecturer, is with the Department of
Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, Pembroke
Street, Cambridge CB2 3QZ, United Kingdom. J.W. CHRISTIAN,
Emeritus Professor of Physical Metallurgy, is with the Department of
Metallurgy and Science of Materials, Oxford University, Parks Road,
Oxford OX1 3PH, United Kingdom.
This paper is based on a presentation made in the symposium
"International Conference on Bainite" presented at the 1988 World
Materials Congress in Chicago, IL, on September 26 and 27, 1988,
under the auspices of the ASM INTERNATIONAL Phase Transformations
Committee and the TMS Ferrous Metallurgy Committee.
was used rather modestly even by Bain and his coworkers.
In a paper on the nomenclature of transformation
products in steels, Vilella et al. tSj mentioned an
"unnamed, dark etching, acicular aggregate somewhat
similar to martensite" when referring to bainite. Hoyt,
in his discussion to this paper, appealed to the authors
to name the structure, since it had been first produced
and observed in their laboratory. Davenport t61 ambiguously
referred to the structure, sometimes calling it "a
rapid etching acicular structure," at other times calling
it bainite. In 1940, Greninger and Troiano used the term
"Austempering Structures" instead of bainite, tTl The 1942
edition of the book The Structure of Steel, and its reprinted
version of 1947, by Gregory and Simmons, contains
no mention of bainite, t8j
The high-range and low-range variants of bainite were
later called "upper bainite" and "lower bainite," respectively,
I9j and this terminology remains useful to this day.
Smith and Mehl II~ also used the term "feathery bainite"
for upper bainite, which forms largely, if not exclusively,
at the austenite grain boundaries in the form of
bundles of plates and only at high reaction temperatures,
but this description has not found frequent use. In fact,
both upper and lower bainite ferrite consist of aggregates
of plates, and such aggregates were later designated as
sheaves of bainite.[~l]
B. The Early Research
Early research into the nature of bainite continued to
emphasize its similarity with martensite. Bainite was believed
to form with a supersaturation of carbon, f12-16J
Vilella et al. cSI postulated that the transformation involves
the abrupt formation of flat plates of supersaturated
ferrite along certain crystallographic planes of
the austenite grain; the ferrite then was supposed to reject
carbon at a rate depending on temperature, leading
to the formation of carbide particles (as opposed to the
lamellar carbides found in pearlite). The transformation
was believed to be, in essence, martensitic, "even though
the temperature be such as to limit the actual life of the
quasi-martensite to millionths of a second." Bain 121 reiterated
this view in his classic book Alloying Elements
in Steel. Isothermal transformation studies were, by then,
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--767
becoming very popular and led to a steady accumulation
of data on the bainite reaction (still variously referred to
as the "intermediate transformation," "dark etching
acicular constituent," "acicular ferrite," etc.).
For alloys of appropriate composition, the upper ranges
of bainite formation were found to overlap with those of
pearlite, preceded in some cases by proeutectoid ferrite.
Thus, the nomenclature became further confused since
the ferrite which formed first was variously described as
massive ferrite, grain-boundary ferrite, acicular ferrite,
Widmans~tten ferrite, etc. On a later view, some of these
microconstituents are formed by a "displacive "tlT~ or
"military "t18~ transformation of the iron atoms (together
with any substitutional solute atoms) from austenite to
ferrite, and are thus similar to carbon-free bainitic ferrite,
whereas others form by a "reconstructive" or "civilian"
transformation, which is a quite different kinetic
process.
1. Crystallography
By measuring the crystallographic orientation of austenite
using twin vestiges and light microscopy, Greninger
and Troiano tTl were able to show that the habit plane of
martensite in steels is irrational; these results were consistent
with earlier work on nonferrous martensites and
disproved the contemporary view that martensite in steels
forms on the octahedral planes of austenite. They also
found that with one exception, the habit plane of bainite
is irrational and different from that of martensite in the
same steel. The habit plane indices also tended to vary
with the transformation temperature and the average carbon
concentration of the steel. The results seemed to imply
some fundamental difference between bainite and martensite.
Because the habit plane of bainite seemed to approach
the austenite octahedral plane (then thought to be
the habit plane of Widmanst~itten ferrite) at high temperatures
but the cementite habit at low temperatures,
and because it always differed from that of martensite,
Greninger and Troiano proposed that from the very beginning,
bainite forms from austenite as an aggregate of
ferrite and cementite. Thus, a competition between the
ferrite and cementite of the aggregate was suggested as
the reason for the observed variation of bainite habit, the
ferrite controlling at high temperatures and the cementite
at low temperatures. The crystallographic results were
later confirmed by Smith and Mehl t~~ using an indirect
and less accurate method. These authors also showed that
the orientation relationship between bainitic ferrite and
austenite does not change very rapidly with transformation
temperature and carbon concentration, and is
within a few degrees of the orientations found for martensite
or Widmanst~itten ferrite, but differs considerably
from that of pearlitic ferrite/austenite. Since the orientation
relationship of bainite with austenite was not found
to change, Smith and Mehl considered Greninger and
Troiano's explanation for habit plane variation to be inadequate,
implying that the habit plane cannot vary independently
of orientation relationship.
2. The incomplete-reaction phenomenon
It was known as long ago as 1939 that in certain alloy
steels (such as Fe-1.1Cr-1.1Mo-0.33C wt pct) "in which
the pearlite change is very slow," the degree of transformation
to bainite decreases (ultimately to zero) with
increasing isothermal transformation temperature, r~9~
Similarly, the bainite transformation in an Fe-2.98Cr-
0.2Mn-0.38C wt pct alloy was found to begin rapidly
but cease shortly afterward, with the maximum volume
fraction of bainite obtained increasing with decreasing
transformation temperature.t2~ At no temperature investigated
did the complete transformation of austenite occur
solely by decomposition to bainite. The residual austenite
remaining untransformed after the cessation of the
bainite reaction reacted by another mechanism (pearlite)
only after a further long delay. Other experiments on
several chromium-containing steels (0.08-1.28C wt pct)
revealed that the total dilatometric expansion accompanying
the initial rapid formation of bainite increased continuously
with decreasing reaction temperature. ~2u The
curve of total expansion vs temperature was found to show
an increasing slope as a function of carbon concentration.
The odd feature of such results was that the bainite
transformation did not seem to reach completion on isothermal
heat treatment, even though full transformation
to pearlite could be achieved at a higher transformation
temperature. Often, the transformation of austenite at
lower temperatures occurred in two stages,t2~ beginning
with the bainite reaction, which stopped prematurely,
followed by the formation of pearlite at a slower rate.
As will become apparent later, it is significant that the
two reactions may only be separated by a long delay in
well-alloyed steels; in plain carbon steels, "the second
reaction sets in within a few seconds after the beginning
of the bainite reaction."t2~
3. Carbon redistribution
X-ray and other experiments indicated that the formation
of bainite enriches the residual austenite in carbon.
Klier and Lyman t2~ took this to imply that the
austenite, prior to its transformation to bainite, becomes
compositionally unstable and separates into carbon-rich
and carbon-depleted volumes (a process like this would
require uphill diffusion). The low-carbon regions were
postulated to transform into supersaturated bainite of
the same composition by a "martensite-like" lattice rearrangement,
which then rapidly decomposed further
by precipitating iron carbides. A similar suggestion had
been made earlier by Kurdjumov f22~ with respect to
Widmanstfitten ferrite: "regions of low carbon concentration
in the y crystal result from diffusion within the
y phase, and these regions can at this time transform into
theaphase..."
4. Thermodynamics
In a far-reaching paper, Zener ~23~ attempted to give a
rational thermodynamic description of the phase transformations
that occur in steels. He assumed that bainite
growth is diffusionless, any carbon supersaturation in
bainitic ferrite being relieved subsequent to growth by
partitioning into the residual austenite. The atomic
mechanism of bainite growth was not discussed in detail,
but he believed that unlike martensite, there is no strain
energy associated with the growth of bainite. Thus, bainite
should form by diffusionless transformation at a temperature
just below To, where the austenite and ferrite of
the same composition have identical free energy. However,
To is frequently used in martensite theory for the
768--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
temperature at which austenite and martensite (i.e.,
supersaturated tetragonal "ferrite") have the same free
energy; for clarity, we follow Christian and Edmonds t241
and call this temperature To,.. The Bain strain applied to
a random interstitial solution of carbon in austenite
automatically produces the ordered tetragonal form of
ferrite if the carbon atoms are trapped in their original
sites, but Zener also supposed that the tetragonal form
may be regarded as a result of an ordering of the interstitial
atoms into one set of sites of the cubic structure.
He derived an equation for the critical temperature, T,.,
at which the cubic and tetragonal forms of ferrite have
the same free energy; Tc rises with interstitial solute content
and, thus, intersects the Ms temperature and also has
a joint intersection with the To and To,. temperatures.
Clearly, To,. lies below To at low-carbon contents and
above To at high-carbon contents. According to one
interpretation, t25] martensite formed above room temperature
is cubic at carbon contents below the intersection
of Ms and Tc (above 2.5 at. pct carbon in plain ironcarbon
alloys) and tetragonal above it. As Zener pointed
out, martensite cannot form until the driving force obtained
by supercooling below the To or Tom temperature
is large enough to provide the necessary strain energy.
It is usually assumed that bainite forming first as fully
supersaturated ferrite nevertheless has a cubic structure,
but it would seem more logical to assume a tetragonal
structure, unless the temperature of formation is above T,..
The Zener model failed to provide an explanation of
why the strain energy should exist for martensite and not
for bainite. On the other hand, it explained the data
showing that the degree of transformation to bainite increases
with supercooling from zero at an upper limit,
which is generally known as the Bs temperature. The carbon
that partitions into the austenite after the formation
of bainite changes its composition, until it eventually becomes
thermodynamically impossible for the austenite to
transform without a composition change. For a given alloy
composition, a higher undercooling below To would allow
more bainite to form before transformation without a
composition change becomes impossible. Consistent with
experimental data, the model also requires the bainite
"C" curve of the time-temperature-transformation (TTT)
diagram to tend asymptotically to infinite time at a temperature
corresponding to To or To,., whichever is the
higher, since the transformation of austenite without a
composition change cannot occur above this limit.
The initial plates of bainite, unlike those of many martensites,
often grow to a limited size less than that of the
parent austenite grain. Zener postulated that this is due
to the formation of a layer of cementite around the plate,
which stifles any subsequent growth.
5. Paraequilibrium
By 1947, it was evident that the cementite, which grows
during the bainite transformation in alloy steels, differed
from that associated with pearlite. The pearlitic cementite
was always found to contain a higher than average
concentration of some substitutional alloying elements,
whereas bainitic cementite seemed to have about the same
overall substitutional alloy content as the parent material.
Hultgren t261 has cited several references which report
magnetic, chemical, and X-ray data on extracted
carbides which confirm this difference between the two
kinds of carbides.
Hultgren was, at the time, proposing a model for the
role of substitutional alloying elements in steels; at high
temperatures where diffusion rates are reasonable, these
elements can redistribute during transformation if equilibrium
demands such redistribution. In these circumstances,
the transformation was said to occur under
"orthoequilibrium" conditions. This compares with
"paraequilibrium" transformation, in which the substitutional
alloying elements are unable to partition during
the time scale of the experiment, although carbon, which
is a fast diffusing interstitial element, redistributes between
the phases and reaches equilibrium subject to this
constraint.
The mechanism of pearlite formation was itself not
clear in those days, but the transformation was believed
to be initiated by the nucleation of cementite. It was suggested
that bainite was instead initiated by the nucleation
of ferrite. (93~ Hultgren put these ideas together and
postulated that the transformation at high temperatures
(upper bainite) begins with the nucleation of ferrite of
paraequilibrium carbon concentration, so that the residual
austenite is enriched with respect to carbon. This
bainitic ferrite, unlike the ferrite associated with pearlite,
was believed to have a Kurdjumov-Sachs (KS) or
Nishiyama-Wasserman (NW) orientation relationship with
the parent austenite in which it grows; this was considered
to explain the difference in ferrite morphology observed
experimentally in pearlite and bainite. Bainitic
ferrite was always found to consist of individual plates
or sheaves, whereas the ferrite in pearlite apparently
formed alternating plates of a regularly spaced two-phase
lamellar aggregate. The enrichment of austenite with respect
to carbon should then eventually lead to the paraequilibrium
precipitation of cementite from austenite in
a region adjacent to the bainitic ferrite. At the time,
pearlitic cementite was thought to bear a rational orientation
relation to the austenite grain into which the
pearlite colony grows, and Hultgren proposed, without
any evidence, that bainitic cementite should be randomly
oriented to the austenite in which it precipitated. This
process of ferrite and subsequent cementite precipitation
then repeated, giving rise to the sheaf of bainite. Therefore,
Hultgren considered upper bainite to be a kind of
a reconstructive transformation, in essence similar to
pearlite but growing under paraequilibrium conditions and
different in the orientation relations of the various phases
with respect to the parent austenite.
No explanation was offered for the occurrence of paraequilibrium
with bainite, nor for the existence of the various
orientation relationships. He admitted the possibility
that bainite formed at lower temperatures (later known
as lower bainite) "forms directly," implying that the
bainitic ferrite formed with a supersaturation of carbon,
although the mechanism was not discussed.
The model of pearlite formation involving the repeated
formation of ferrite and cementite was abandoned
when Hillert f28J demonstrated that a pearlite colony really
consists of two interwoven crystals, one of ferrite and
the other cementite. Hillert [28,29] also pointed out an important
distinction between pearlite and upper bainite; in
the former case, the ferrite and cementite phases grow
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--769
cooperatively, whereas in the latter case, the plates of
bainitic ferrite form first, with the precipitation of cementite
being a subsequent reaction.
6. Kinetics
The experiments of Wiester, I3~ Hannemann et al.,[31]
and Forster and Scheil [32'33~ indicated that martensite can
grow very rapidly in steels, with a plate taking a few
microseconds to grow right across an austenite grain.
Bunshah and Mehl [341 later demonstrated that the rate of
growth of martensite can be as high as 1 km s -t, i.e.,
one-third the velocity of sound. This gave rise to the
incorrect impression that martensitic transformation does
not involve a "nucleation and growth process;" i.e., it
is not a first-order transformation in the thermodynamic
sense.* For example, Smith and Mehl [~~ wondered
*The Ehrenfest t35~ classification of phase transformations is based
on the successive differentiation of a thermodynamic potential (e.g.,
Gibbs free energy) with respect to an external variable, such as temperature
or pressure. The order of the transformation is given by the
lowest derivative to exhibit a discontinuity. In a first-order transformation,
the partial derivative of the Gibbs free energy with respect to
temperature is discontinuous at the transition temperature. Thus, there
is a latent heat of transformation evolved at a sharp transformation
interface which separates the coexisting parent and product phases.
The phase change occurs at a well-defined interface, the interface separating
perfect forms of the parent and product phases. First-order
transformations involve the nucleation and growth of a product phase
from the parent phase. In a second-order transformation, the parent
and product phases do not coexist. Martensite in steels can coexist
with austenite and is then separated from the latter by a well-defined
interface. It is, like bainite, a first-order transformation involving the
nucleation and growth of individual plates.
whether bainitic structures form by a process of nucleation
and growth or whether the plates spring fully formed
from the matrix lattice "as they do in the transformation
to martensite." A nucleation and growth model was favored,
since the sizes of the reacted regions apparently
increased with time at the reaction temperature. This was
consistent with the work of Wever and his coworkers,
[12,13,36] who found that in the bainite transformation
range, the austenite decomposes relatively slowly.
Furthermore, the progress of the bainite transformation
could be represented by means of a C curve on a TTT
diagram, [11 with a well-defined incubation period before
the beginning of isothermal transformation. Martensitic
transformation, on the other hand, could not be suppressed
by the fastest available quench rates; I37J it seemed
to form athermally and was represented on the TTT diagram
by a family of lines parallel to the time axis. [381
The bainite reaction was found to follow C-curve kinetics
even below the Ms temperature.J39]
It is in this context that Ko and Cottrell [4~ attempted
to investigate whether bainite is ~a nucleation and growth
reaction, or like martensite, forms in a fraction of a second."
They also wanted to establish whether the transformation
leads to surface relief effects similar to those
associated with martensitic transformations. Ko and
Cottrell were able to demonstrate, through hot-stage light
microscopy, that bainite grows relatively slowly and that
its formation causes the shape of the transformed region
to change, the shape change being characterized qualitatively
as an invariant-plane strain. They also noted that
unlike pearlite, which is not hindered by austenite grain
boundaries, t27[ bainite growth terminated at austenite twin
or grain boundaries. Therefore, the transformation was
similar to martensite, and Ko and Cottrell attempted to
identify any clear differences that may exist between
martensite and bainite.
It was known already that martensite first forms at a
large undercooling below the To temperature, at which
ferrite and austenite of identical composition have equal
free energy. [23'411 Since diffusionless transformation is
thermodynamically feasible below To, the extra undercooling
was believed necessary to account for the strain
and, to a lesser extent, the interface energy associated
with the formation of the martensite plate. Bainite, which
can form at more elevated temperatures than martensite,
should, therefore, require a modified mechanism of
transformation, a mechanism which has to be consistent
with the lower driving force that is available for the
transformation of austenite at higher temperatures. Ko
and Cottrell postulated that a "coherent nucleus" can develop
either into martensite or into bainite, depending
on the driving force available for transformation, the nucleus
developing into martensite below Ms. At the higher
temperatures where bainite occurs, "coherent growth"
can only "take place when the strain due to the density
change is relieved." They suggested that this could happen
if the amount of carbon dissolved in bainite is reduced;
this would also lead to a free energy reduction.
The removal of carbon from the ferrite could occur by
diffusion from bainite or by precipitation within bainite,
or by a combination of these processes, depending on
the transformation temperature. It is not entirely clear
from their description whether they envisaged initially
diffusionless growth followed by carbon diffusion to
provide the driving force for further growth, or whether
the diffusion and interface migration are coupled so that
precipitation within the ferrite (for lower bainite) or carbon
rejection to the austenite (for upper bainite) takes
place at the moving interface. The former mechanism
seems illogical, since the extra driving force is only
available after a stage of initial growth to martensite,
which should not be possible (according to their growth
condition) above Ms. Provided there is some way of circumventing
the difficulty of forming the initial coherent
nucleus (of whatever composition), the second type
of growth model would allow bainite to form above Ms
and, indeed, above To. In some later work, Ko [42] distinguished
between incoherent ferrite and "acicular
ferrite," which he proposed should be regarded as
carbon-free bainitic ferrite.
Kriesement and Wever [43[ pointed out that the appearance
of bainite changes continuously between upper and
lower bainite and postulated that the growth of bainite
involves the repeated and alternating nucleation and
growth of lamellae of cementite and ferrite from austenite;
unlike pearlite, the growth direction of the macroscopic
plate of bainite was supposed to be normal to the
plane of the lamellae. Although this particular mechanism
has since been shown to be incorrect, they identified
clearly the condition necessary for cementite
precipitation to occur from residual austenite during the
bainite transformation. Cementite (0) precipitates from
austenite if the carbon concentration of the latter exceeds
that given by the extrapolated 7/(7 + 0) phase boundary.
Although many of the characteristics of bainite,
770 -- VOLUME 21 A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
especially the morphology and the shape deformation,
had been found to be similar to those of martensite, a
different microstructural approach was developed by
Aaronson. t44j He used the Dub6 morphological classification
t45,46] for all nonpearlitic forms of ferrite formed
from austenite, and he attributed the morphological variations
to the dependence of the growth kinetics of an
interface and to the nature of the site from which a precipitate
crystal develops. In particular, plate morphologies
were regarded as the result of the formation of
immobile, partly coherent planar interfaces, which can
grow normal to themselves only by the lateral migration
of "ledges." In a later discussion of bainite, taTJ he developed
the "microstructural" definition, in which bainite
is regarded simply as a nonlamellar two-phase
aggregate of ferrite and carbides in which the phases form
consecutively (as distinct from pearlite, where they form
cooPeratively ). Aaronson stated that according to this
definition, the upper limiting temperature of bainite formarion
should be that of the eutectoidal reaction (Ael),
and he denied that the kinetic Bs temperature has any
fundamental significance. In those alloy systems where
there seems clear evidence for a separate C curve for
bainite, the bainitic "bay" and the apparent upper limit
of bainite formation (Bs) were attributed to a special effect
of certain alloying elements on the growth kinetics.
Aaronson equally dismissed the observation of surface
relief as a basis for classifying the various forms of ferrite.
C. Summary of the Early Research
By the beginning of the 1960's, bainite was generally
regarded as a transformation product differing significantly
from various forms of proeutectoid ferrite, as well
as from pearlite and martensite. The results of the early
research can be summarized as follows.
Bainite can be obtained by isothermal transformation
at all temperatures where the formation of pearlite and
proeutectoid ferrite is sluggish and also at temperatures
below the martensite-start temperature.
Upper bainite, when it forms at relatively high temperatures,
was found to consist of sheaves of femte plates
with cementite particles trapped between the plates,
whereas lower bainite contained fine cementite particles
within the bainitic ferrite platelets themselves.
Observations using light microscopy indicated that the
lengthening of bainite sheaves occurred at a rate much
slower than that at which martensite plates were known
to grow. Bainite sheaves were found to have irrational
habit planes, the indices of which differed from those of
martensite found in the same alloy. The orientation relationship
between bainitic ferrite and austenite was, on
the other hand, similar to that between martensite and
austenite. Bainite plates were never found to cross austenite
grain boundaries, and the formation o.f bainite was,
like martensite, observed to cause the shape of the parent
crystal to change. This shape deformation amounted, in
present day terminology, to an invariant-plane strain (IPS).
In steels where transformation to bainite could be carried
out without interference from other reactions, experiments
demonstrated that the degree of transformation
to bainite decreases (ultimately to zero), and the time
taken to initiate the reaction increases rapidly with increasing
isothermal transformation temperature. This led
to the definition of a "bainitic-start" temperature, Bs, above
which there is no reaction; this temperature was always
found to lie well within the (metastable) a + 3' phase
field. Other reactions could follow the bainitic transformation,
but in all cases, the rapid formation of bainite
ceased prematurely before the austenite was fully
transformed.
The prevailing, albeit rather ill-defined, concept of the
bainite reaction as involving a martensitic-type interface
combined with diffusion-controlled growth had already
led to the suggestion of bainitic reactions in other (nonferrous)
alloy systems. In particular, the observation of
surface relief effects apparently combined with compositional
changes in the decomposition of some/3-phase
copper-zinc alloys had been used in a pioneering paper
by Garwood t481 to identify this decomposition as bainitic,
and the difficulties in accounting for such a reaction
in purely substitutional alloys had been emphasized, r49J
This remains an interesting and controversial aspect of
transformation theory / 5~
In summary, the early emphasis on the similarities between
bainitic and martensitic transformations still dominated
the literature in the 1960's, and the contrasting
views of Aaronson and his co-workers were only beginning
to emerge. These views, however, later led to considerable
controversy, which has continued until the
present time. Some of the dispute has been only semantic
and, thus, of marginal importance; into this category,
we would put Ko's proposal that the term "bainite" should
be extended to include Widmanst~itten ferrite forming with
a shape change (thus satisfying what Aaronson has termed
the shear definition of bainite, but contravening the reaction
kinetics definition). The various disputes do,
however, also concern mechanisms and, thus, are important.
In what follows, we shall be arguing that there
are useful mechanistic distinctions to be made between
the coherent growth of ferrite initially supersaturated with
carbon (bainite), the coherent growth of Widmanst~itten
ferrite under paraequilibrium conditions, and the incoherent
growth of ferrite under local equilibrium conditions.
II. BAINITIC FERRITE
In this section, we propose to discuss in detail the ferritic
component of bainite, focusing on its morphology,
crystallography, constitution, and kinetics. The treatment
of the carbides associated with the bainite transformation
is discussed in Section III.
A. Sheaves of Bainite
1. Morphology
Both upper and lower bainite consist of aggregates of
platelets or laths of ferrite separated by regions of residual
phases. These consist of untransformed austenite or
of phases such as martensite or cementite, which form
subsequent to the growth of bainitic ferrite. The aggregates
of bainitic platelets are called sheaves, [11] and the
individual platelets are sometimes called subunits. The
platelets within a given sheaf may not be completely isolated
from one another by the residual phases, in which
case, low-misorientation grain boundaries are formed
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--771
along the surfaces where the platelets come in contact.
This is because within a sheaf, the subunits all tend to
be in a common crystallographic orientation. The cluster
of platelets that form a sheaf is sometimes called a
"packet" of bainite because, on the scale of light microscopy,
fully transformed grains of austenite appear to
be divided into discrete regions (i.e., packets), within
which the traces of the habit planes of bainite are parallel.
The term has its origins in the description of lath
martensite in low-alloy, low-carbon steels, where laths
of martensite are also found to be in parallel formations
(e.g., References 52 and 53). The similarity in both
morphology and crystallography between lath martensite
and upper bainite has been noted in many investigations,
but it also appears that there may be differences in the
detailed crystallography (see Section II-D).
A possible explanation for the fact that som e of the
austenite adjacent to the bainitic ferrite remains untransformed
at the reaction temperature is that its carbon concentration
increases as a consequence of transformation
to such an extent that the formation of bainite eventually
becomes thermodynamically impossible. If the starting
carbon concentration of the steel is large, the formation
of bainite ceases at an earlier stage of the reaction, and
the volume fraction of the residual phases is then expected
to be large.
Two-surface analysis and other observations on specimens
partly transformed to bainite show that the overall
morphology of a sheaf on a macroscopic scale is in three
dimensions, like that of a wedge-shaped plate, the thicker
end of which originates at an austenite grain boundary.[
54-59] The microscopic subunits, within a sheaf themselves,
have a lenticular plate or lath morphology which
is most prominent near the edge or tip of a sheaf where
impingement effects are minimal; for the same reason,
these features are easily observed in partially transformed
specimens. The width of a subunit near the tip
of a sheaf is approximately the same as that near the
original nucleation site of the sheaf (i.e., an austenite
grain surface), implying that the subunits grow to a limiting
size. In the development of a sheaf, new subunits
are most frequently nucleated near the tips of subunits,
which are already present, rather than on their sides. The
overall morphology of a sheaf is illustrated schematically
in Figure 1.
When the subunits are in the form of laths, each lath
has its longest dimension along the close-packed direction
of the ferrite, which is most nearly parallel to a closepacked
direction of the parent austenite. [6~ It is not
clear why the subunits sometimes grow in the form of
laths,/54,6~ whereas on other occasions form as
plates. [54,56,57,59,621 A qualitative impression from the literature
is that the plate morphology tends to form at lower
transformation temperatures.
In some cases, lower bainite sheaves seem to develop
with a macroscopically planar interface on just one side
of each sheaf; [57'63] the same effect has been found in lath
martensite in an iron-nickel-manganese alloy.[64] In other
cases, the thickening of sheaves has been observed to
occur from both sides of the habit plane. [65] The aspect
ratio (thickness/length) of such sheaves is known to decrease
with transformation temperature but is not sensitive
to the substitutional alloy content, at least for the
~MATIC ILLUSTRATION OF A SHEAF OF BAINITE
SUB-UNIT ~ x , , ~ ~
SUB-UNI~
Fig. 1--Schematic illustration of the morphology of a sheaf.
relatively low-alloy steels that have been studied to
date. [65'66'671 The sheaf width decreases with transformation
temperature, [68,69] although the subunit width is
not influenced by either the austenite grain size or the
bainite sheaf size. [69,7~ Similar effects are found with
martensite, [71,72] but their detailed explanation is not yet
available.
2. Stereology
The "grain size" of bainite usually has to be characterized
by measurements made on random planar sections
of the microstructure, as observed using a
transmission electron microscope using replica or thin
foil specimens. In such sections, the ferrite plates appear
approximately parallel-sided, and the thickness is then
measured in a direction normal to the long edges of the
plates. The average value of the measurements is taken
to represent a "grain size," which is really an apparent
plate thickness. The procedure is useful in characterizing
any qualitative trends in microstructure but obviously ignores
stereological considerations. For example, if a
platelet is represented as a disc of radius, r, and thickness,
t, with r >> t, then the mean intercept length is
given by/$3 = 2t, and the mean intercept area is given
by .4 = 2rt. [731 Note that the intercepts are, in this
case, random with respect to the orientation of the
microstructure.
The specific manner in which the grain size of an anisotropic
structure is defined is also application-dependent.
For example, in considering strengthening due to lath
boundaries, it is appropriate to examine the dimensions
of the available slip planes within individual platelets.
I74,751 If it is assumed that there is a random distribution
of slip plane orientations with respect to the lath
axes, the grain-boundary strengthening effect (tTg) is found
to be of the form trg = kgM -~, where kg is a constant
and M is the mean value of the larger diameter of a slip
plane. Note that this behavior differs from the classical
Hall-Petch relation, where it is the inverse square root
of grain size which matters.
There is some uncertainty about the influence of carbon
on the grain size of bainite; Pickering [76] found the
772--VOLUME2 1A,A PRIL1 990 METALLURGICATLR ANSACTIONAS
size to be independent of carbon concentration for bainite
produced during continuous cooling transformation,
although Davenport t6~ states (without citing evidence)
that it is a well-known effect that the size decreases with
carbon concentration. In fact, the apparent thickness of
bainite is, in general, found to increase with transformation
temperature from about 0.2 to 2/zm when the
transformation temperature changes from 425 ~ to
570 ~ respectively, for an Fe-0.22C wt pct commercial
steel, and similar data have been reported for other
steels. [77-8~ Whether this reflects a change in the plate
aspect ratio is not clear.
Bainitic ferrite formed at high temperatures often contains
subgrain boundaries, the subgrain size becoming
finer for bainite formed at lower temperatures. 1761 The
boundaries are probably a consequence of the recovery
(polygonization) of the dislocation structure introduced
during transformation at high homologous temperatures.
B. Dislocation Density
It is commonly observed in experiments using transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) that bainite has a
"high" dislocation density, although there are few quantitative
data to support this. Smith t811 has shown, using
TEM, that an Fe-0.07C-0.23Ti wt pct alloy, the estimated
Bs temperature of which is about 650 ~ t821 has
a mean dislocation density of 0.5 • 10 TM m -2 when isothermally
transformed to allotriomorphic ferrite at 800 ~
whereas when the same alloy is transformed to bainite
at 650 ~ the dislocation density obtained is 4 •
1014 m -2. It is particularly significant that the dislocation
density in bainite is found to be higher than that in allotriomorphic
ferrite, which has formed at a similar transformation
temperature. ~63~
The relatively high dislocation density associated with
bainitic ferrite is often attributed to the fact that it forms
by a shear mechanism, on the grounds that this necessitates
the deformation of the parent lattice by dislocations
which are then somehow incorporated into the
product phase. This reasoning is, however, incorrect, since
the dislocations that are responsible for the transformation
and for the lattice-invariant deformation are located
in the interface between the parent and product lattices.
Indeed, there are many such transformations where few
dislocations are to be found in the product phase (e.g.,
thermoelastic martensites).
If the shape deformation accompanying displacive
transformation is accommodated at least partially by plastic
relaxation, then the resulting dislocation debris introduced
into the austenite can be inherited by any bainite
that forms subsequently. Plastic relaxation may also follow
in the bainite itself, since the yield stresses of both
ferrite and austenite decrease with increasing transformation
temperature. Plastic relaxation of the shape change
has been observed experimentally; when prepolished
samples of austenite are transformed to bainite, the adjacent
austenite surface does not remain planar but, instead,
exhibits curvature which is characteristic of slip
deformation, t571 Observations of the transformation using
hot-stage TEM have revealed that the growth of bainite
is accompanied by the formation of dislocations in and
around the bainite, [831 and direct observations of the
austenite/bainitic ferrite interface also provide evidence
of plastic accommodation in both phasesJ s41 Sandvik and
Nevalainen t8~ have demonstrated that the austenite adjacent
to the bainitic ferrite undergoes twinning deformation
and that the density of twins increases as the
transformation temperature decreases. The plastic accommodation
is also believed to be responsible for the
lower residual stresses in samples which are bainitic,
compared with those transformed to martensite, f85j
The dislocation density of bainitic ferrite seems to increase
as the transformation temperature is reduced, 186j
although there are few quantitative data to this effect.
X-ray line profile measurements show that the lattice strain
(due to the presence of dislocations) increases as the
transformation temperature decreases, t87! These can be
used to estimate the dislocation density, Pal; for the lowalloy
steel used by Fondekar et al. ,[87] isothermal transformation
to bainite at 300 ~ 360 ~ and 400 ~ gave
dislocation densities of 6.3 • 1015, 4.7 • 1015, and 4.1 •
10 is m -2, respectively.
C. Chemical Composition
1. Substitutional alloying elements
It is generally accepted that there is no long-range redistribution
of substitutional alloying elements during the
growth of bainitic ferrite. See, for example, Aaronson
and Domian, t88j where some of the electron-microprobe
analysis results refer to bainitic ferrite. The bulk substitutional
alloy content of the bainitic ferrite was found to
be identical to that of the parent austenite. A variety of
other results using the atom-probe technique on steels
containing silicon, nickel, manganese, chromium, or
molybdenum confirm that there is no bulk partitioning
of substitutional alloying elements during the formation
of bainitic ferrite. [89-93] One set of atom-probe experiments
I94] apparently indicated the opposite conclusion,
namely, that there is a redistribution of chromium and
molybdenum during the formation of bainite. These resuits
are, however, doubtful, since they indicate a depletion
in the interface and an enrichment in the bulk
phases on both sides of the transformation interface. Indeed,
the measured concentrations in both phases sometimes
exceeded the average concentration in the alloy
used.
The behavior of the atoms on substitutional sites during
transformation is critical in specifying the mechanism
of the change. The iron and substitutional atoms
(X) do not diffuse during displacive transformation, so
that the ratio of Fe/X atoms is expected to be constant
throughout a transforming crystal, even on the finest
conceivable scale.
During reconstructive transformation, the atoms transfer
across the interface in an uncoordinated manner which
accomplishes the required lattice change and simultaneously
ensures a minimization of the strain energy. This
requires the thermally activated migration (in the interface
region at least) of all the atoms, irrespective of
whether the transformation occurs in a pure metal or in
an alloy. There will normally be a volume change associated
with the stress-free change of structure, and, at
sufficiently high temperatures, this may be compensated
by a flux of vacancies (and an opposite flux of atoms)
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--773
between the growing precipitate and the dislocations, grain
boundaries, and (ultimately) the free surface of the parent
phase. At temperatures where the rate of diffusion
in the parent phase is inadequate for such an adjustment,
reconstructive growth with minimum strain energy will
still be possible if the precipitate has a lenticular (tapered
plate) shape, and the reconstruction takes place in such
a way that the volume change is simply an expansion or
contraction normal to the plane of the lens. This can be
achieved by atomic migration entirely within, or in the
limit around, the particle. Reconstructive growth is,
however, scarcely feasible unless all atoms have some
mobility in the incoherent interface, roughly equivalent
during the time of growth to a diffusion distance of the
order of magnitude of the dimensions of the particle. This
necessary mass flow has been described as "reconstructive
diffusion," and the two classes of transformation have
been called "diffusional" and "displacive ''t951 in place of
the older divisions mentioned above, into "reconstructive"
and "displacive" or "civilian" and "military." Bainite
was one of the first transformations for which this wider
classification was needed to replace the original division
into "nucleation and growth" and "martensitic" transformations,
08,961 and we avoid using the term "diffusional
transformation" here, since it refers only to the
motion of the Fe + X atoms. If diffusional is used as
one main category, there is the apparent paradox that a
displacive transformation, in which there is segregation
of carbon during growth, has to be described as "nondiffusional"
even though the growth rate might be controlled
by the diffusion rate of carbon!
In an alloy in which there is some atomic mobility
within the parent phase, the reconstruction provides an
opportunity for the solvent and solute atoms to redistribute
between the two phases. However, in a system
such as Fe-C-X, the diffusion rate of carbon in the austenite
may be as much as 10 7 to 10 9 times greater than
that of a substitutional atom in the temperature range of
interest, t971 and these very different rates of atomic migration
mean that true equilibrium segregation with regard
to all components may not be produced at a migrating
interface. It is, however, possible to envisage growth
under diffusion control with local equilibrium at the
interface in the sense that the compositions of the two
phases are joined by a tie line of the equilibrium diagram,
even though this tie line does not pass through the
point representing the initial (or average) composition of
the alloy. When these kinetic restrictions apply, the two
phases may differ either significantly or negligibly in
substitutional solute content. A qualitative analysis for
ternary steels was first developed by Hillert, t981 and a
simplified quantitative theory in which diffusion cross
terms are neglected was developed by Kirkaldy, I991 Purdy
et al.,[~~17a6n d Coates; [~~ the effect of the cross terms
was later examined by Coates. r1~176 The simple theory
shows that for the diffusion-controlled growth of ferrite
from austenite in an Fe-C-X alloy with initial composition
near the y/a + y phase boundary (i.e., with a
small supersaturation), the tie line selected will have the
carbon composition of the austenite at the interface almost
equal to that of the bulk alloy so that the activity
of carbon is nearly constant in the austenite, thus reducing
the driving force for carbon diffusion almost to zero.
There will be a concentration gradient of the substitutional
solute ahead of the interface, resulting in appreciable
partition, and the relatively slow growth rate will
be determined by the diffusion rate of this solute. For
large supersaturations, the tie line will have the Fe + X
composition of the ferrite virtually identical with that of
the bulk austenite and partitioning of the substitutional
solute will be extremely small, with a relatively fast
growth rate. These are referred to as the partitioning local
equilibrium (P-LE) and negligible partitioning local
equilibrium (NP-LE) growth modes, t~~176176176a nd, for a
high ratio of the diffusivities, the theory predicts an abrupt
transition from one to the other as the supersaturation
increases.
In the NP-LE mode, the concentration of X
is uniform, except for a small "spike" in the parent
phase adjacent to the interface. As the ratio of
interstitial:substitutional diffusion rates increases, the
width of this spike decreases, and when it becomes of
the order of atomic dimensions, the concept of local
equilibrium at the interface is invalid and has to be
replaced (assuming the growth is, nevertheless, diffusioncontrolled)
by that of paraequilibrium. [98,1~176 In conditions
of paraequilibrium, there is no redistribution of
Fe + X atoms between the phases, the Fe/X ratio remaining
uniform right up to the interface. One interpretation
of the paraequilibrium limit is that reconstructive
transformation occurs with all displacements of the Fe +
X atoms taking place in the incoherent interface; another
interpretation might be that only displacive transformation
can occur. In either case, to quote from Coates, "the
slow diffuser and the solvent participate only in the change
of crystal structure." Paraequilibrium implies that the
growth rate is controlled by the interstitial diffusivity,
the interface compositions now being given by the tie
lines of the pseudoequilibrium between the two phases
under the constraint of a constant Fe-X ratio.
In conclusion, the experimental evidence that bainitic
ferrite has the same bulk substitutional content as its parent
austenite is consistent with both reconstructive and
displacive mechanisms for the change in crystal structure.
However, reconstructive transformation with local
equilibrium (or, indeed, any state between local and
paraequilibrium) requires some perturbation of the
substitutional solute content in the proximity of the
interface. Very detailed atom-probe experiments, which
have a chemical and spatial resolution on an atomic
scale, ~89-93] have all failed to show any evidence of such
redistribution of alloying elements (Cr, Mn, Mo, Ni, and
Si) at the interface between bainitic ferrite and austenite.
These experiments were all based on steels where other
reactions do not interfere with the formation of bainitic
ferrite. Measurements of the growth rates of grainboundary
allotriomorphs of ferrite from austenite in alloy
steels under conditions where bulk segregation is not observed
(e.g., References 108 and 109) indicate calculated
thicknesses of the spike of much less than 0.1 nm,
and although these results are complicated by the effect
of grain-boundary diffusion, they are in general agreement
with the concept that the lattice diffusion rate is
inadequate to sustain local equilibrium at the growing
interface. Only at temperatures above 600 ~ has segregation
of some (though by no means all) substitutional
774--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
elements been obtained in grain-boundary allotriomorphs.
t88] Allotriomorphs are agreed to form by reconstructive
mechanisms, but the absence of bulk segregation
at moderately high transformation temperatures reinforces
the belief, derived from the observed shape change,
that bainitic ferrite forms at lower temperatures by a displacive
rather than a reconstructive mechanism.
2. Interstitial alloying elements
A particular experimental difficulty with the bainite
transformation is that in the case of upper bainite, at least,
it is almost impossible to say anything about the initial
carbon content of the ferrite because the time taken for
any carbon to diffuse into austenite can be very small.
For the moment, we refer to the interstitial content of
bainitic ferrite after transformation. As will be seen later
(Section IV), the concentration during transformation is
likely to be different.
Internal friction experiments indicate that the amount
of carbon which associates with dislocations in bainitic
fen-ite increases as the transformation temperature decreases,
but it is independent of the alloy carbon concentration,
at least in the range of 0.1 to 0.4 wt pct C. t86]
This is consistent with the observation that the dislocation
density of bainitic ferrite increases with a decrease
in transformation temperature. The insensitivity to the
alloy carbon concentration is because most of the carbon
either ends up in the residual austenite or precipitates as
carbides in the ferrite. The results also show that at some
stage during the evolution of bainitic ferrite, it must have
contained a higher than equilibrium concentration of
carbon.
These observations have been confirmed directly by
using microanalysis on an imaging atom probe, which
has demonstrated quantitatively that the posttransformation
carbon content of bainitic ferrite tends to
be significantly higher than equilibrium. [89-93]
D. Crystallography
The properties of bainitic steels are believed to depend
on the crystallographic texture that develops as a consequence
of transformation from austenite. As an example,
the ease with which slip deformation is transmitted
across adjacent platelets of bainitic ferrite must be related
to their relative orientation in space. Bainite grows
in the form of clusters of platelets called sheaves, with
little misorientation between the platelets within any given
sheaf. Where they touch, adjacent platelets are separated
by low-misorientation grain boundaries.
The relative orientation of the bainitic ferrite and its
parent austenite is always close to the classic KS ~11~
and NW tm] relationships. These two rational relations
differ only by a relative rotation of 5.25 deg about the
normal to the parallel close-packed planes of the two
structures, and the exact relative orientation in martensites
is found to be intermediate and irrational, as is predicted
by the crystallographic theory. High accuracy is
required to compare theory with experiment, since the
predicted orientation relation is insensitive to input parameters
such as lattice spacings or lattice-invariant deformation.
In the case of bainite, as in that of lath
martensite, such precision is difficult to achieve, partly
because of the experimental difficulties in retaining austenite
and partly because of the high dislocation densities.
Despite these difficulties, it is significant that the experimental
data always lie well within the "Bain region"
which encompasses the KS and NW relationships. The
Bain strain ]112] is the pure part of the lattice deformation
which, for displacive transformations in steels, converts
austenite into ferrite or martensite. During the Bain strain,
no plane or direction is rotated by more than 1 1 deg ]H31
so that any pair of corresponding planes or directions
may be made parallel by utilizing a lattice deformation
in which the Bain strain is combined with a rotation of
not more than 1 1 deg. This defines the Bain region, and,
for a displacive transformation, it is expected that the
experimentally observed orientation relation will lie within
this region. This need not be the case for reconstructive
transformations, and allotriomorphic ferrite in steels is
known to grow into austenite grains with which it has
an orientation which is random or outside the Bain region3114]
Hence, it is very significant that bainitic ferrite
always exhibits an orientation which is close to KS or
NW and well within the Bain region.
Pickering I86~ has suggested that the crystallography of
bainite can be explained if the individual platelets or laths
adopt different variants of the NW or KS orientations,
such that the ferrite orientations within a sheaf can be
generated simply by rotation about the normal to a specific
close-packed plane of the austenite. In this way,
the bainite laths may nucleate side-by-side in rapid
succession with the transformation strains determining
the variant. This early work was based on measurements
only of ferrite-ferrite orientation relations, since the
specimens may have contained only thin films of austenite
which are observable only with high-resolution
microscopy. However, it must be admitted that results
from more recent work, in which measurements of the
direct austenite-ferrite relations have been made, are still
rather contradictory. There is general agreement that adjacent
platelets or laths in bainite all have a {1 10}~ plane
parallel (or almost parallel) to the same close-packed
{lll}v and that the macroscopic habit plane is near to
{1 1 1}v in upper bainite but is irrational in lower bainite.
Most investigators, t59,115[ find all the platelets within a
sheath or "subpacket" to have a common orientation, but
Sarikaya et al. ILl61 claim that while some groups of adjacent
laths have a common orientation, others have either
different variants of the orientation relationship or, in
lower bainite, are twin-related. Similar discrepancies exist
in crystallographic measurements on lath martensite,
where three types of orientation relation between adjacent
laths of a packet are reported by some workers[
116.117] and only one common orientation by others.tr4, H8]
When there is a common orientation, the platelets within
a sheaf have small misorientations; there is also an appreciable
spread of orientation within a single platelet
because of its high dislocation density. Direct crystallographic
analysis [1~51 indicates that all platelets within a
subpacket have an irrational orientation relation with the
austenite, which is rather closer to NW than to KS.
Moreover, the shape deformations of all the platelets are
identical in agreement with earlier work. I57'59] One further
crystallographic observation made by Sandvik t115] is
of considerable interest. He found that twins formed in
the austenite adjacent to the ferrite and that the ferrite
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--775
laths were able to grow through the twins, producing a
reorientation of the lattice and also displacing the direction
of the twin boundaries in the manner expected for
a displacive (shear) transformation.
Similar results for the relative orientations of adjacent
platelets were obtained in a careful examination of lath
martensite by Sandvik and Wayman, using an iron-nickelmanganese
alloy which contained appreciable retained
austenite./64j They found that although the laths had slight
relative misorientations of up to 2 deg, they all exhibited
the same variant of the parent-matrix orientation relation,
and thick layers of austenite between adjacent laths
indicated that the laths did not form as a result of selfaccommodation
of their shape strains. Thus, this form
of lath martensite seems to be very similar, in substructure
at least, to the bainite investigated by Sandvik.
One possible reason for a common orientation might
be that the individual platelets of a sheaf are not separate
crystals but are continuously connected portions of the
growth front of one original nucleus. At the relatively
high temperatures at which bainite (and lath martensite)
form, the shape change may cause plastic deformation
of the structure leading to copious generation of dislocations,
which stops the forward growth of a platelet after
it has attained a certain size. "Nucleation" of a new platelet
would then simply be resumed growth caused by breakaway
of a part of the original interface in a region near,
but not at, the tip. In bainite, the growth would resume
only after some carbon had been rejected from the ferrite
into the austenite and would be most likely where pinning
by dislocation debris is minimal and where the driving
force is highest due to rapid dispersion of the carbon
rejected to the austenite.
An alternative model is that the individual platelets are
completely separated from each other by thin layers of
austenite, so that each is separately nucleated but always
in the same orientation. In general, the stress field at the
tip will favor renucleation in the same variant, whereas
that at the side of the platelet will favor another variant.
The nucleation of other variants is, of course, essential
if self-accommodating groups are to form and, thus, must
be suppressed for some reason, perhaps because adjacent
sheaves are formed together in a self-accommodating
fashion. At present, there is insufficient evidence to determine
whether either of these speculative descriptions
is valid, although Srinivasan and Wayman, t56,57~
Sandvik, tllSl and Sandvik and Wayman t641 all claimed that
the individual laths in their specimens were isolated from
each other by retained austenite.
As already mentioned, early conclusions about mutual
accommodation may have applied to sheaves rather than
to platelets in each sheaf. Sandvik measured the misorientations
between neighboring subpackets (presumably
neighboring sheaves) in one "packet" of his bainitic
alloy and found that these correspond to different variants
of his irrational orientation relation in which the same
austenite {1 1 1} plane is parallel to a ferrite {1 10} plane.
The six variants which satisfy this condition lead to four
different relative orientations, one of which is only 3 deg
from the original orientation, and the others are, respectively,
8, 1 1, and 14 deg away from a twin orientation.
Sandvik comments that the first misorientation is difficult
to detect and that it is difficult to distinguish the
remaining three from each other. He also comments that
only the variant with orientation relation 14 deg from a
twin relationship gives efficient self-accommodation, and
this was observed fairly infrequently. Thus, adjacent
subpackets are attributed to random association, although
it is not clear why they should then all have the
same pair of parallel close-packed planes. Sandvik and
Nevalainen I8~ have also suggested that adjacent sheaves
of bainitic ferrite are approximately twin related and
correspond to variants of a near NW orientation.
1. Autocatalytic nucleation
Autocatalytic nucleation is a term commonly associated
with martensitic transformations, t119,12~ The nucleation
of martensite in steels is believed to begin at
structural imperfections in the parent phase, such as arrays
of dislocations. These are the preexisting defects
which, on cooling below the Ms temperature, dissociate
into suitable partial dislocations in a way which leads to
the nucleation of martensite. [121,122,123] The defects are not
all identical (they vary in potency) and are stimulated to
grow into plates of martensite at different degrees of
undercooling below the Ms temperature. This is the cause
of the classical behavior observed for athermal martensitic
reactions in which the volume fraction of martensite
varies only with the undercooling below Ms.
Detailed analysis reveals that the initial number density
of preexisting defects typically found in austenite is
not large enough to explain the kinetics of martensitic
transformation. The extra defects necessary to account
for the faster than expected transformation rates are attributed
to autocatalysis: when plates of martensite form,
the 3, induce new embryos which are then available for
further transformation. Three mechanisms have been
proposed for autocatalysis, t124~ In stress-assisted nucleation,
the activation of less potent defects at a given temperature
is induced by the internally generated elastic
stresses arising as a consequence of the shape change
due to transformation. In strain-induced autocatalysis,
the creation of new and more potent nucleating defects
is induced by some plastic accommodation in the parent
phase. Finally, "interfacial autocatalysis" refers to the
nucleation of new martensitic units from the existing
martensite/austenite interfaces. Autocatalysis is responsible
for the "bursts" of transformation that occur in certain
martensitic steels, from which the initial formation
of a plate stimulates a disproportionately large degree of
further transformation, sometimes causing the emission
of audible clicks.
All of these effects arise as a consequence of the severe
elastic and plastic disturbance of the austenite in the
immediate vicinity of a plate of martensite. It is the shape
change due to the martensitic transformation that is the
cause of the disturbance. On this basis, autocatalysis
should also feature prominently in bainitic transformations
which are accompanied by similar shape deformations.
There is, however, a significant difference in
that bainite formation occurs at relatively low driving
forces, where defects induced by transformation do not
seem to play as crucial a role in stimulating further nucleation.
The initial nucleation event is almost always
confined to the austenite grain surfaces, which presumably
contain the most potent defects for nucleation.
776--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
Intragranular nucleation of bainite can essentially be ignored
except when nonmetallic particles may act as nucleation
surfaces. The initial formation of a platelet of
bainite (or of lath martensite) must lead to appreciable
elastic and plastic strains, but this does not seem to cause
the nucleation of other platelets in different orientations,
as happens with plate martensite, and "bursts" of transformation
are not observed. In the case of bainite, this
may be because the driving force is only adequate for
the formation of a carbon-free nucleus, and this may be
impossible to form in the carbon-enriched region around
an existing platelet. Whatever the reason, it seems that
strain-induced autocatalysis does not play an important
role in bainite formation. As already discussed, there is
some evidence for stress-assisted autocatalysis if it is indeed
true that adjacent sheaves form in such a way as
to help accommodate each other's shape deformation.
The concept of autocatalytic nucleation may be related
to that of sympathetic nucleation, defined by Aaronson
and Wells t111 as the nucleation of a precipitate crystal at
the interphase boundary of a previously formed crystal
of the same phase when the matrix and precipitate differ
in composition. Although in discussing sympathetic nucleation,
volume strain energy "can be effectively ruled
out" according to Aaronson, t44~ it seems clear that many
examples of this phenomenon would be alternatively interpreted
as autocatalytic nucleation by other workers.
2. Phenomenological theory
We have seen that the bainite transformation exhibits
crystallographic features and surface relief effects similar
to those associated with martensitic reactions. It is
then natural to assume that the phenomenological theory
of martensite crystallography t125,1261 should be applicable
to bainite. The crystallographic theory predicts a unique
relationship between the habit plane, shape deformation,
orientation relationship, lattice types, and lattice-invariant
deformation. It can only be tested satisfactorily when these
variables are not determined in isolation. Much of the
early data (reviewed by Bowles and Kennon E1271) are incomplete
in this sense but consistent with the theory. All
of the early measurements of habit planes must now be
interpreted to refer to the habit planes of bainite sheaves,
rather than of the individual subunits.
Finally, we note that a considerable difficulty in applying
the theory to bainite is the lack of accurate structural
information relating to the transformation which is
needed as input data. Thus, if bainite grows with a full
supersaturation but the carbon escapes in a very short
time, the measured lattice parameters of upper bainitic
ferrite will not relate to the initially formed structure,
which may even have been tetragonal. A similar difficulty
exists for lower bainite if appreciable carbide precipitation
has taken place before any measurements are
possible.
Srinivasan and Wayman [56,571 reported the first detailed
results on the crystallography of sheaves of lower bainite
in an Fe-I.llC-7.9Cr wt pct alloy (Bs ~ 300 ~ Ms
-34 ~ in which large quantities of austenite remained
untransformed at ambient temperature. Each sheaf was
found to have just one planar face when examined using
light microscopy, and this was taken to be the habit plane.
The (irrational) habit plane indices were found to exhibit
a small degree of scatter beyond experimental error, the
mean indices being close to (254)~ relative to the orientation
variant in which (111)~ is almost parallel to (011L
and [101], is at a small angle to [ l l l L ; this is henceforth
called the standard variant. The martensite habit plane
in the same alloy is close to (494)y, and the difference
in the two habits and in the exact orientation relations
led Srinivasan and Wayman to the conclusion that the
mode of displacive transformation is different in bainite
and martensite. Their measured habit plane is only about
6 deg from that found for a different alloy by Sandvik,
who pointed out, however, that his result applied to an
individual platelet whereas that of Srinivasan and Wayman
was for the average "habit" of a subpacket or sheath.
The shear component of the shape deformation, as averaged
over the entire sheaf, was measured to be -0.128,
the magnitude of the total shape strain being -0.129.
This is consistent with the earlier data of Tsuya t1281 and
Speich. |65~ The actual shape strain for an individual subunit
must of course be larger, and was estimated using crystallographic
theory as being 0.23; this compares with the
0.28, 0.25, and 0.22 estimated for different alloys by
Ohmori, 1581 Bhadeshia, t1291 and Sandvik, [1151 respectively.
Srinivasan and Wayman t56,57j showed that their data on
lower bainite are indeed consistent with solutions based
on the phenomenological theory of martensite. It was
found that the sheaf habit plane and orientation relationship
could be predicted for an undistorted habit plane if
it is assumed that the lattice-invariant shear is irrational
in both plane and direction. On the other hand, if the
habit plane is permitted to undergo a small isotropic contraction,
then the lattice-invariant shear (for the standard
variant) consists of a double shear on the planes (1T1)v
and (101)v in the common direction [i01]v (these correspond
to (101)~, (112)~, and [111]~, respectively). This
double system is equivalent to a single shear on an irrational
plane and is not associated with any of the difficulties
encountered in theories which postulate more
general combinations of lattice-invariant shears. The
component planes on which the interface dislocations
would glide are those usually considered as candidates
for single lattice-invariant shears in the martensite theory.
However, at the time of the Srinivasan and Wayman
work, it was not fully appreciated that the so-called habit
plane of a sheaf (which they measured) may differ from
that of a platelet within a sheaf (which Sandvik measured),
and it is not yet clear whether the phenomenological
theory of martensite should be applied to the sheaf
or the platelet. It may be more important to minimize
long-range distortions over the whole sheaf, in which
case the invariant-plane condition would apply to the apparent
habit plane of the sheaf, but in cases where there
are reasonably thick layers of austenite between the
platelets, it seems more logical to apply the theory to the
individual platelet.
Hoekstra and his co-workers t~3~ recently examined
the crystallography of bainite in an Fe-0.35C-0.25Si-
0.6Mn-4.5Ni-l.3Cr wt pct alloy isothermally transformed
at 365 ~ They used hot-stage light microscopy
and a technique for determining the orientation of the
austenite using twin vestiges, so that the resulting habit
plane data they obtained are assumed to refer to the sheaf
habit plane, which was found to be irrational with mean
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--777
indices {569}~. The observed small degree of scatter was
attributed to the development of internal stresses during
transformation. The ferrite orientation was measured using
electron diffraction. The habit plane indices with respect
to the ferrite were determined using the criterion that a
unique orientation relationship and habit plane should
emerge from an analysis of three sets of experimental
data. The habit with respect to ferrite was found to be
close to {2 7 10}~, and an analysis of the results led them
to conclude that the crystallography of bainite in their
samples was inconsistent with the phenomenological
theory of martensite. The analysis (Figure 5 of Reference
132) does not, however, seem correct because the
angles made by the habit plane pole to the {111}~ [[ {011}~
planes and to the (101)~ II (111)~ directions are not in
fact the same for the three sets of data analyzed.
3. The crystallography of a lath of bainite
It has already been noted that the subunits of a bainite
sheaf may adopt the morphology of a plate or of a lath,
where the latter is idealized as a parallelepiped of dimensions
a, b, and c, with a > b > c. There is a general
tendency for the lath shape to be adopted when the transformation
occurs at relatively high temperatures. The
crystallography of such laths has been characterized in
detail and to a high level of accuracy by Davenport tr~
as follows:
growth direction
habit plane (area -- ab)
face of area = ac
orientation relationship (KS)
[i01] r 11 [iilL
(232)~ -1[ (i54L
(101) v
[i01]r [I [iiu~
(lll)v ]l (011),
where the crystallography is for consistency stated in
the standard variant described earlier. Hence, the major
growth direction of each lath corresponds to the nearly
parallel close-packed directions from the a and y lattices.
This is consistent with less direct trace analysis
results which indicated that the major growth direction
of the laths lies along (1T1)a. [61'63'1331 The habit plane indices
are significantly different from earlier data which
indicated a {111}~ habit, t7,61 63] but those analyses were
either of insufficient precision or were concerned with
the apparent habit planes of sheaves.t6~ Davenport also
demonstrated that sets of two groups of laths with a common
growth direction but with virtually orthogonal habit
planes tended to form in close proximity.
There is, as yet, no detailed analysis available which
can predict these results.
III. CARBIDE PRECIPITATION
A. Upper Bainite
The carbide phase associated with upper bainite is almost
always cementite. [21 ,2 6, 1 04, 1 34-136]* Upper bainitic ferrite
*In steels containing high levels of silicon (--2 wt pct), transition
carbides such as r precipitate first from austenite, but given the opportunity,
they tend to transform into cementite, t~37~ The transition carbide
K has a hexagonal lattice, with a = 6.9 and c = 4.8 A. Schissler
et alY 3~1 reported a new carbide of orthorhombic lattice (a = 6.5, b =
7.7, and c = 10.4 A), which precipitates from the residual austenite
during the bainite reaction in an Fe-I.15C-3.9Si wt pct alloy transformed
isothermally at 420 ~ The addition of about 1 wt pct Mn to
the alloy changed this to another new carbide, also with an orthorhombic
lattice, but with lattice parameters a = 14.8, b = 11.4, and
c= 8.5A.
does not itself contain any carbide precipitates.
As a consequence of transformation to bainite, the
austenite that is trapped between platelets of upper bainite
becomes enriched in carbon. If the carbon concentration
of the residual austenite (i.e., %) exceeds that
given by the extrapolated 7/(T + 0) phase boundary,
then cementite precipitation from the enriched austenite
lying adjacent to the platelets of bainitic ferrite becomes
thermodynamically possible, t43~ This secondary reaction,
involving the formation of cementite, reduces the carbon
concentration in the residual austenite and is accompanied
by the formation of a further amount of ferrite
(designated a). The mechanism of this secondary reaction
is not fully established, but in view of the very small
diffusion coefficients of iron and substitutional atoms at
the temperatures involved and the absence of an incoherent
interface or grain boundary to start the process, it is
unlikely to involve reconstructive transformation.
Sandvik L~39~ has proposed that the decomposition of the
residual austenite involves the displacive formation of a
triclinic carbide close to cementite in structure and the
subsequent formation of a small amount of bainitic ferrite.
Nakamura and Nagakura, I14~ in a study of the second
stage of martensite tempering, suggested that
cementite and ferrite form directly from austenite, the
cementite nucleating on the ferrite/austenite boundaries
and growing by rapid diffusion along this boundary, and
the secondary ferrite growing martensitically. The sequence
of reactions during the process can be summarized
as follows:
~ ~ "~- ab,SUPERSATURATED
O~b,UNSATURATED "~ ")/ENRICHED
"'9' O/b,UNSATURATED ~- Ol 7!- 0 [1]
This contrasts with the cooperative growth of cementite
and ferrite during the formation of pearlite in plain carbon
steels:
y~ a + 0 [21
and with the formation of pearlite in substitutionally alloyed
steels:
y--~a+ 0+ y' [3]
where y' is austenite which differs in composition when
compared with the original austenite with respect to both
substitutional and interstitial solute; the reaction stops
when all the phases are homogeneous and of equilibrium
composition before all the austenite has transformed.
In planar sections, the cementite particles appear parallel
to the traces of habit planes of the bainitic ferrite
platelets. Using TEM and extraction replicas, Fisher I14u
showed that the cementite particles in upper bainite are
in the form of irregular ribbons in three dimensions, particularly
when bainite forms at high temperatures. Carbide
precipitation also occurs at austenite grain boundaries,
and this may influence mechanical properties, especially
778--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
toughness.[76] The precipitation of cementite from supersaturated
austenite probably first occurs at the austenite
grain boundaries so that those carbides can be expected
to be relatively coarse.
B. Lower Bainite
Lower bainite also consists of a nonlamellar aggregate
of ferrite and carbides. However, there are two kinds of
carbides. Like upper bainite, precipitation of carbides from
the enriched austenite occurs between the bainite platelets.
In addition, there is usually a fine dispersion of
platelike carbides (e-carbide or cementite) within the
lenticular ferrite plates. As will become apparent, the
mechanism of precipitation is different for the two sites.
1. Precipitation within lower bainitic ferrite
In contrast to the microstructure obtained after tempering
martensite, the carbides found within any given
bainitic ferrite plate usually occur in a single crystallographic
orientation. When the carbide is cementite, examination
of planar sections shows that the particles have
their longest axes inclined at some 60 deg to the "growth
direction" of the ferrite platelets. [65,142-144j The sharp edges
of the ferrite platelets are reported to be free of carbides.
The carbides within the bainitic ferrite may or may not
touch the sides of the ferrite plates. [1291 Of course, the
angle quoted must vary as a function of the plane of
section; examination has shown that for lower bainitic
ferrite that has a habit plane with approximate indices
(0.761 0.169 0.626) 7, the cementite precipitates on (112)~
so that the true angle between the a and cementite habit
plane normals is approximately 57 deg. [129j Similar resuits
have been obtained for the angle between the lower
bainite sheaf and 0 habit plane normals.t581 In some cases,
the carbides have been found to form on several different
variants of the {112}4 planes, although a particular variant
tends to dominate. [56,84'1451
Early experiments using Curie point measurements and
dilatometry gave indirect indications that the carbide
precipitation associated with lower bainite is not always
cementite. [36,146,1471 Austin and Schwartz [1351 first identified
the presence of e-carbide in lower bainite. Since
then, several investigators have reported the detection
of e-carbide in association with lower bainite.
[63'115'139'145'148-152] Matas and Hehemann [148] interpreted
these results by suggesting that the initial carbide
in hypoeutectoid steels is e-carbide, which is then replaced
by cementite on holding at the isothermal transformation
temperature. The rate at which the e-carbide
converts to cementite increases with temperature, but also
depends on steel composition; a high silicon concentration
(-2 wt pct) in the steel considerably retards the reaction.
This is consistent with the fact that silicon is known
to retard the formation of cementite during the tempering
of martensite. [153,154,155]
The detection of e-carbide in lower bainite is important
in that it implies the existence of a rather high carbon
supersaturation in bainitic ferrite, perhaps to a level
of the order of 0.25 wt pct. t156[ However, e-carbide is
not always found as a precursor to the precipitation of
cementite in lower bainite. Bhadeshia and Edmonds [841
failed to detect e-carbide in a high-silicon medium-carbon
steel (Fe-3.0Mn-2.02Si-0.43C wt pct) even during the
early stages of the lower bainite transformation. The steels
in which e-carbide has been observed during the formation
of lower bainite are listed in Table I.*
*e-carbide has been reported in bainite produced by continuous
cooling transformation in an Fe-0.15C-0.94Mo-2.12Cr wt pct steel t1571
and in an Fe-0.34C-1.25Mn-1.39Ni-0.34Mo wt pct alloy isothermally
transformed to bainite3 m~ In both cases, the evidence quoted is rather
indirect.
These observations can be rationalized in terms of a
theory of tempering due to Kalish and Cohen, [159[ who
showed that it is energetically favorable for carbon atoms
to remain segregated at dislocations when compared with
their presence in the e-carbide lattice. [1291 If the dislocation
density is high, then sufficient carbon can be tied
up at the dislocations so that the e-carbide stage is missed
in the precipitation sequence. In such cases, cementite
precipitation occurs directly. Kalish and Cohen estimated
that a dislocation density of 2 • 1012 cm -2 should
prevent e-carbide precipitation in steels containing up to
0.20 wt pct carbon. Judging from available data (Table I),
and if steels containing a large amount of nickel are excluded,
then it seems that there is sufficient carbon for
the precipitation of a detectable amount of e-carbide if
the average carbon content of the steel is above -0.55 wt
pct. Otherwise, the partitioning of carbon into the residual
austenite depletes the bainitic ferrite too rapidly to
permit any significant precipitation of e-carbide. It is
believed that nickel enhances the precipitation of
e-carbide, [69[ and this is consistent with the lower carbon
concentrations (-0.4 wt pct) at which e-carbide forms
during the bainite transformations in these steels.
Narashima Rao, and Thomas [16~ have demonstrated a
similar effect of nickel in martensitic steels; they found
e-carbides and cementite to be the dominant carbides
during the tempering of martensite in Fe-0.27C-4Cr-5Ni
and Fe-0.24C-2Mn-4Cr wt pct steels, respectively. The
other substitutional elements may also have some effect
on these phenomena, but this has not been systematically
studied. If lower bainite containing e-carbide is tempered,
the latter transforms to cementite and the reaction
is accompanied by a volume contraction, which can be
monitored accurately using dilatometry. [1511
Finally, r/-carbide (Fe2C) has also been observed in
lower bainitic ferrite obtained by transforming the austenite
matrix of a high-silicon cast iron. [161,1621 This carbide
has previously only been reported in tempered
martensite [163,1641 and so reinforces the conclusion that the
carbides precipitate from carbon-supersaturated lower
bainitic ferrite. Like e-carbide, tentative results indicate
that the overall carbon concentration of the parent austenite
has to exceed some critical concentration before
the r/-carbide can be readily detected in lower
bainite. [161,162]
2. Precipitation between lower bainitic
ferrite platelets
Since some of the carbon in the alloy is tied up in the
form of carbides within the ferrite, the volume fraction
of residual austenite trapped between bainite platelets is
less for lower bainite, t1511 Hence, the decomposition of
this austenite into cementite and ferrite leads to a smaller
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--779
Table I. Compositions of Steels (Weight Percent) in Which e-Carbide Has Been Found in Lower Bainite
C Si Mn Ni Cr Mo V References
0.95 0.22 0.60 3.27 1.23 0.13 -- Matas and Hehemann t148]
0.60 2.00 0.86 -- 0.31 -- -- Matas and Hehemann t148]
1.00 0.36 -- 0.20 1.41 -- -- Matas and Hehemann [14sl
0.58 0.35 0.78 -- 3.90 0.45 0.90 Matas and Hehemann ]1481
1.00 2.15 0.36 . . . . Delirytl*9]
0.60 2.00 0.86 -- 0.31 -- -- Oblak and Hehemann t63J
0.60 2.00 . . . . . Hehemann t151
0.41 1.59 0.79 1.85 0.75 0.43 0.08 Lai ~
0.54 1.87 0.79 -- 0.30 -- -- Huang and Thomas o52]
0.74 2.40 0.51 -- 0.52 -- -- Sandvik tuS]
0.40 2.01 -- 4.15 -- -- -- Miihkinen and Edmonds [69]
volume fraction of interplate cementite.* The precipi-
*A consequence of this is that lower bainite often has a higher
toughness than upper bainite, even though it usually is stronger than
upper bainite.
tation reactions for lower bainite can be summarized as
follows:
Case 1: High dislocation density
")t ~ ")/ "~- O~b,SUPERSATURATED
-") 01N FERRITE "~ O/b,UNSATURATED -~- TENRICHED
-'-> OLb,UNSATURATED "~ O~ + 0BETWEEN FERR1TE PLATES
+ O~ ~ITE [4]
Case 2: Low dislocation density
")/----> ')t + O~b,SUPERSATURATED
e-carbideiN FERRrrE + O/b,UNSATURATED
-[- ]/ENRICHED
----> O~b,UNSATURATED -t- e-carbidelN FERRITE "~ O~
-[- 0BETWEEN FERRITE PLATES
O/b,UNSATURATED ~- 0IN FERRITE
+ 0BETW~ FERRrrE PLATES + a [5]
A new carbide, which, for convenience, is designated
K-carbide, has been discovered in high-carbon steels
transformed to lower bainite, t149aS~ It occurs as a transition
carbide, precipitating at a late stage of the transformation,
from the carbon-enriched residual austenite.
Its crystal structure is discussed later (Section III-D).
The carbide has a high solubility for Si and, on contiw
ued holding at the isothermal transformation temperature,
transforms to x-carbide which, in turn, eventually
gives way to the more stable cementite. Similarly, the
transition carbide discovered in high-silicon transformer
steels by Konoval et al. ,t165] with an orthorhombic lattice
(parameters a = 8.8, b --- 9.9, and c = 14.4 A), has
been reported to precipitate from lower bainitic ferrite in
Fe-1.15C-3.9Si wt pct alloy, t138J
C. Kinetics of Carbide Precipitation
1. Partitioning and distribution of carbon
The carbon concentration of bainitic ferrite during
transformation is of major importance in determining the
kinetics of carbide precipitation; bainite, however, forms
at relatively high temperatures and any excess carbon in
the ferrite can be removed by the precipitation of carbides
within the ferrite or by the diffusion of carbon into
the residual austenite. The two mechanisms of carbon
removal usually take place simultaneously, although one
or the other may dominate, depending on temperature.
Both events can be rapid because of the high mobility
of carbon in iron.
The partitioning of carbon into austenite lowers its
chemical potential. The process was simulated experimentally
by Matas and Hehemann, [1481 with the help of
tempering experiments on mixtures of martensite and retained
austenite. Single crystals of austenite (Fe-1.23Cr-
0.60Mn-0.13Mo-3.27Ni-0.22Si-0.95C wt pct) were
cooled below the Ms temperature (-350 K) to obtain two
microstructures, one containing 50 pct martensite and the
other 90 pct martensite in a matrix of austenite. The
crystals were then tempered at 405 K to allow the carbon
to diffuse from martensite into austenite. The tempering
treatments caused rapid e-carbide precipitation in the
martensite, precipitation which lowered the carbon concentration
of martensite to 0.22 wt pct, a value approximately
consistent with that quoted by Roberts et al. ~t56]
for the equilibrium between martensite and e-carbide.
Continued holding at the tempering temperature led to
further reductions in martensite carbon concentration, the
carbon diffusing into the residual austenite. The rejection
of excess carbon into austenite occurred more rapidly
for the sample containing less martensite because
the larger amount of residual austenite provides a bigger
sink for carbon.
The distribution of carbon in the residual austenite is
not, in general, homogeneous after isothermal transformation
to bainite. The austenite is enriched to a greater
extent in the immediate vicinity of bainite platelets or in
regions trapped between platelets.[148,166] Carbon causes
an expansion of the austenite lattice parameter, and, in
some cases, two lattice parameters have been observed
for the retained austenite, corresponding to different levels
of carbon in the austenite within a single specimen.
I1481 In many cases, the austenite that is relatively
780--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
poor in carbon decomposes martensitically on cooling to
ambient temperature. Any subsequent measurement of
the carbon concentration of austenite (xv) using an X-ray
method would then lead to an overestimation of xv if it
is assumed that carbon is distributed uniformly in the
residual austenite that existed at the isothermal transformation
temperature. For example, for upper bainite in a
high-silicon steel, X-ray measurements indicated that the
carbon concentration of the austenite retained at ambient
temperature was about 1.7 wt pct, whereas volume fraction
measurements gave an average concentration of
1.35 wt pct for the residual austenite which existed at
the transformation temperature, r137]
2. Kinetics of precipitation from residual austenite
The incomplete reaction in silicon and some other alloy
steels strongly suggests that the precipitation of carbides
during the bainite reaction occurs after the formation of
bainitic ferrite. Therefore, carbide formation can lag behind
that of bainitic ferrite. The extent of this lag depends
both on temperature and on alloy composition; for
steels which transform rapidly, the lag may not be
detectable.
Using a chemical technique which separates precipitated
carbon from that in solid solution together with dilatometry,
it is possible to show that during the formation
of bainite at high temperatures, the amount of carbide
formed is proportional to the amount of bainitic ferrite
at any stage of the reaction. (167] On the other hand, for
lower transformation temperatures, the carbide precipitation
reaction is found to lag significantly behind the
formation of bainitic ferrite. The steel used to establish
these results contained only small concentrations of substitutional
solutes and it is likely that an increase in alloy
content would, in general, lead to changes in the relative
kinetics of all reactions.
With lower bainite, it is necessary to distinguish between
the carbides within the bainitic ferrite (which precipitate
rather rapidly) and those which form by the
decomposition of the carbon-enriched residual austenite
which is trapped between the ferrite plates. Transmission
electron microscopy studies on an Fe-4.08Cr-0.3C wt
pct alloy have shown that of the two reactions which
lead to carbide formation in lower bainite, the precipitation
of cementite from the residual austenite is a comparatively
slow processJ 1291 Isothermal transformation at
435 ~ for l0 minutes (a time long enough to allow the
formation of bainitic ferrite to reach completion) gave
cementite within the lower bainitic ferrite, but the regions
between the ferrite platelets remained as untransformed
austenite. It was necessary to hold the alloy at
the transformation temperature for a period of 30 minutes
before cementite began to precipitate from the residual
austenite. The slow rate of this precipitation reaction might
indicate that, in contrast to the precipitation within ferrite,
it is ~ reconstructive transformation. However, as
suggested by Sandvik, [1391 both transformations might be
displacive so far as the iron atoms are concerned, and
the difference may be ascribable simply to the difference
in the diffusion rates of carbon in ferrite and austenite.
The most striking evidence that the formation of carbides
from residual austenite lags behind the formation
of bainitic ferrite and behind the precipitation of carbides
within the ferrite is found in steels containing relatively
large amounts of silicon. For example, no carbide formation
accompanies the formation of upper bainite in
Fe-0.31Cr-0.86Mn-2.00Si-0.60C wt pct alloy, even after
holding at the isothermal transformation temperature for
several hours, t]48] Similar results have been reported by
LeHouillier et al. [1371 and by many other researchers.
Silicon is usually present in steels as an aftermath of
the deoxidation reactions involved in the steelmaking
process. However, it is clear that the effect of relatively
large deliberate additions of silicon on the upper bainite
reaction is to retard the formation of cementite from austenite,
thereby giving a microstructure of just bainitic
ferrite and austenite. [84A37'149-151'168] Silicon in cast irons
has long been known to favor the formation of gray cast
iron, which contains large amounts of graphite instead
of the cementite found in low-silicon white cast irons.
The precipitation of cementite during the tempering of
martensite is significantly retarded by the presence of
silicon, [2,153-]55A69'17~ and the phenomenon has been used
in the design of one of the most successful ultrahighstrength
steels (commercial designation 300M). [~7~]
The effect of silicon is generally reconciled with the
fact that its solubility in cementite is very small. It intuitively
seems reasonable that high-silicon steels consequently
form a poor environment for the precipitation
of cementite. The need for silicon to diffuse away from
the cementite/ferrite interface could explain the retardation
of its growth. [153] During the tempering of martensite
in high-silicon steels, the retardation of cementite
growth allows transition carbides to persist for longer
periods. At one time, it was thought that the effect is
really due to the stabilization of the transition carbides,
which have a high solubility for silicon, rather than the
retardation of cementite growth, (154,1721 but recent work
shows that the transition carbides are not particularly enriched
with respect to silicon, t~73]
Aluminum in solid solution is also believed to retard
tempering reactions. [~74,175A761 In all respects, aluminum
seems to behave in a similar way to silicon with respect
to both the bainite and martensite transformations,
although detailed data, for example on its solubility in
carbides, are not available.
The fact that carbide precipitation from residual austenite
lags behind that from bainitic ferrite is also established
for steels containing little or no silicon or aluminum.
In an Fe-0.3C-4.08Cr wt pct alloy isothermally transformed
to lower bainite at 435 ~ for 10 minutes, the
phase between the cementite-containing ferrite platelets
is found to be austenite, whereas if the sample is held
at the transformation temperature for 30 minutes, the
austenite is replaced with cementite. (lzg] Heavily alloyed,
low-carbon steels also show this effect: in an Fe-0.06C-
0.27Si-l.84Mn-2.48Ni-0.2Mo wt pct alloy, no cementite
could be detected long after the cessation of the bainite
transformation at 460 ~ It was only after a mixture of
bainitic ferrite and carbon-enriched austenite (obtained
by isothermal transformation at 460 ~ was annealed at
600 ~ for 2 hours did cementite formation eventually
occur. [1771 A similar effect can be found in coppercontaining
steels, where cementite formation only occurs
after annealing the mixture of bainitic ferrite and retained
austenite at an elevated temperature. [178]
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--781
3. Kinetics of precipitation within bainitic ferrite
It is particularly interesting that the precipitation of
cementite from martensite or lower bainite can occur under
conditions where the diffusion rates of iron and substitutional
atoms are very small compared with the rate of
precipitation. The long-range diffusion of carbon atoms
is of course necessary, but, because of its interstitial
character, substantial diffusion of carbon remains possible
even at temperatures as low as -60 ~
Thus, the formation of cementite in these circumstances
must differ from the normal reconstructive decomposition
reactions, which should become too sluggish
at low temperatures. For this reason, it has been believed
for some time that the cementite lattice may be generated
by the deformation of the ferrite lattice, combined with
the necessary diffusion of carbon into the appropriate sites.
The ways in which the ferrite lattice could be deformed
to produce the right arrangement of iron atoms needed
to generate the cementite or e-carbide structures have
been considered phenomenologically by Andrews t18~ and
Hume-Rothery et al.,tl8U and the subject has been reviewed
by YakelJ ~82] The models are not, however, sufficiently
developed to predict transformation kinetics apart
from suggesting that if the diffusion of iron is not necessary,
the precipitation reaction may be relatively rapid.
D. Crystallography of Carbide Precipitation
in Bainite
Some of the details of the crystal structures of the carbides
found in bainite or in tempered bainite are presented
in Table II; a comprehensive review has recently
been published by Yakel. [ls21
During normal isothermal transformation to bainite,
i.e., where the steel has not been held at temperature for
periods long enough to allow long-range substitutional
atom diffusion, only e-carbide, 7/-carbide, or cementite
precipitate within bainitic ferrite, and only cementite or
K-carbide precipitate from the carbon-enriched austenite
between the ferrite platelets. The other carbides form
during tempering or during prolonged holding at the isothermal
transformation temperature. Shackleton and
Kelly [189,19~ reported that on rare occasions, M23C 6 and
M7C 3 could be found as transformed bainite, but the heat
treatment they used was not fully specified, and the observations
subsequently have not been verified. The crystal
system of MTC 3 is conventionally reported as hexagonal
(a = 13.982, c = 4.506/~), but there is evidence that it is
better regarded as an ordered orthorhombic structure, t~gT~
1. Cementite: Orientation relationships
Shackleton and Kelly [189'19~ conducted a very detailed
and extensive study of the orientation relationships that
exist between ferrite and carbides in bainite. The carbides
within lower bainitic ferrite were always found to
exhibit the orientation relationships observed for cementite
that forms during the tempering of supersaturated
martensite. As with martensite, the most frequently observed
orientation relationship, also called the tempering
or Bagaryatski ~ relationship, was found to be
{001}0 [[ {211}~
<1OO5o II (0il).
The next most frequently observed a/0 orientation relationship,
which is also consistent with the tempering
of martensite, was found to be
{o01}0 II {2i5}o
(100)0 within 2.6 deg of (3il)~
(010)0 within 2.6 deg of (131)~
For the cementite that precipitates during the formation
of upper bainite, Shackleton and Kelly showed that
the large number of observed orientation relationships
could all be rationalized if it is assumed that the cementite
precipitates from austenite with the Pitsch ~ y-0
relationship:
{0Ol}0 fl {225},
(100)0 within 2.6 deg of (3571) v
(010)0 within 2.6 deg of (ii0)~
The a-O relationships can be generated from the 3,-0 relationship
by allowing the ferrite to be a variant of the
KS a-3, orientation relation.
These results have been confirmed subsequently I86a291
and are important in understanding the mechanism of the
bainite transformation; they suggest that in lower bainite,
the carbides precipitate from ferrite which is supersaturated
with respect to carbon, since the same O/a
orientations are found during the tempering of martensite.
The O/a orientation relationship found by Isaichev t192]
has also been reported for the cementite within lower
bainitic ferriteJ 58,1521 It is in fact quite close to the
Bagaryatskii relationship (the two are difficult to distinguish
experimentally), and in terms of rational indices,
the Isaichev orientation relationship can be written
(010501[ (1 ii)~
{103}0 [I {101}~
2. The habit plane of cementite
Using single-surface trace analysis, Shackleton and
Kelly showed that for the tempering orientation relationship,
the habit plane of cementite in lower bainitic
ferrite is in the vicinity of the zone containing {1i2}, and
{0il}~ (corresponding to {101}0 and {100}o, respectively).
The results are vague because of the irregular
shape of the cementite particles and because of the inaccuracies
in the technique used. The long dimension of
the cementite laths was found to be - ( l i i ) ~ (corresponding
to (010)0). Note that for these data, the crystallographic
indices have justifiably been quoted with
respect to both the a and 0 lattices, since some of the
trace analyses were carried out using diffraction information
obtained simultaneously from both lattices. The
results are qualitatively consistent with the habit plane
of cementite containing the direction of maximum coherency
between the ferrite and cementite lattices, i.e.,
(010)0 II (lii)o.t,80J
For some alloys, the observation of streaks in electron
diffraction patterns has been interpreted to indicate that
in those cases, the habit plane of the cementite within
lower bainitic ferrite is -{001}0 Jl {211}~ .t571 However,
similar streaking has been observed for a case where the
782--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
Table II. Crystal Structures of Carbides in Bainite or in Tempered Bainite
Carbide Crystal System Fe, M/C References
K hexagonal 1.37 Deliry t1491 and Pomey t~s~
a = 6.9
e hexagonal 2.4 to 3 Jack 1183,1841 and Hofer et al. t~85~
a = 2.735
X monoclinic 2.2 or 2.5 Hiigg tl86]
a = 11.563
c = 5.058
orthorhombic
a = 4.704
orthorhombic
a = 4.525
orthorhombic
a = 4.526
orthorhombic
a = 8.8 b = 9.0
orthorhombic
a = 6.5 b = 7.7
orthorhombic
a = 14.8 b = 11.4
cubic F 23/6
a = 10.621
cubic F 6
a = 11.082
c triclinic Sandvik [1391
a = 6.38 b = 5.05 c = 4.59
a = 90.0deg /3 = 70.1 deg Y = 84.7deg
*/
Fe3C
M7C3
(Fe, Si)Cx
(Fe, Si)Cx
(Fe, Si, Mn)Cx
M23C6
MrC
c = 4.8
c = 4.339
b = 4.573
/3 = 97.44 deg
b = 4.318
b = 5.087
b = 7.010
2 Hirotsu and Nagakura 11631
c = 2.830
3.0
c = 6.743
7/3 Morniroli et al. 087]
c = 12.142
Konoval et al. [~651
c = 14.4
Schissler et al. t~381
c = 10.4
Schissler et al. t138~
c= 8.5
Note: The designation K is used for the new carbide discovered by Deliry 11491 and PomeyJ ~s~ X has not been reported for bainite but is found
during the tempering of martensite so that there is a possibility that it may occur in bainite. The ratio of iron plus other metal atoms to carbon
is designated Fe, M/C. The lattice parameters are stated in angstroms. The actual lattice parameters in any particular alloy must also depend on
its detailed chemical composition.
cementite habit plane is {201}0; the streaking may, therefore,
be due to faulting on the {001}0 planes. [58~
For upper bainite, the carbides precipitate from austenite;
it is not, therefore, surprising that the particles do
not exhibit a consistent set of habit plane indices with
respect to ferrite, although those with respect to the cementite
lattice are always found to be close to {101}0
with a long direction close to (010)0 .[189'19~
3. Three-phase crystallography
Crystallographic information can be interpreted in much
more detail if the data are obtained simultaneously from
austenite, ferrite, and cementite. The first such experiments
were reported by Srinivasan and Wayman, [56,571
and subsequent (contradictory) data were given by
Bhadeshia. [ugl The two sets of data referred to the standard
variant of the austenite-ferrite relation defined above,
and using rational approximations to the measurements,
are as follows:
References 56 and 57
[ i l l ] v i i [011L [I [100]0
[TO1]v II [nil II [o olo
[121]v II [211L II [001]o
Reference 129
[llll~[[ [011L
[0i11~ PI [iilL
[ 0 i l l , II [10010
[liiL II [01010
[21 1],~ II [00110
For the first set of data, ts6.571 the habit plane of the
cementite within the lower bainitic ferrite is found to be
(112)., corresponding to (101) v. Srinivasan and Wayman
noted that this is one of the planes for the lattice-invariant
deformation for lower bainite, as predicted using the
phenomenological theory of martensite, and implied that
this may somehow explain the presence of just one crystallographic
variant of cementite in lower bainite, as
compared with the many found when martensite is tempered.
When the lattice-invariant deformation is slip, as
is the case for bainite, it is incredibly difficult to establish
any microstructural evidence in its support. Srinivasan
and Wayman interpreted the presence of the carbide on
the appropriate planes to lend support to the proposed
mode of lattice-invariant deformation in bainite. It was
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--783
pointed out that the results may not be general, because
they found that for an Fe-3.32Cr-0.66C wt pct alloy, the
cementite habit plane seemed to be {001}0, unlike the
case for the more heavily alloyed sample.
Unfortunately, the second set of data c~291 is not in
agreement with the Srinivasan and Wayman hypothesis,
and they noted themselves that the cementite habit plane
in another Fe-Cr-C alloy containing less chromium and
carbon was (001)0 rather than (010)0. Thus, although the
lattice-invariant deformation may be linked to the nucleation
of cementite under some circumstances, it does
not provide a consistent explanation in others. It also
does not explain why multiple variants of carbides are
observed in martensites. Further experimental results are
highly desirable to ascertain whether the single dominant
variant of cementite formed in lower bainite does have
different crystallographic relations with the ferrite in different
alloys.
Interphase precipitation
An alternative view is that the cementite of lower bainite
nucleates and grows at the austenite-ferrite interface, a
process which is well established in the high-temperature
precipitation of carbides and is described as "interphase
precipitation. ,,r~93] The carbon that is necessary to sustain
the growth of cementite can be absorbed from the adjacent
y, and it is then not necessary for a to be supersaturated.
It is argued that during nucleation, the cementite
should adopt an orientation which provides good lattice
matching with both a and y. If it happens to be the case
that there is only one orientation in space which allows
good matching with both the adjacent phases, then the
theory indicates that only one crystallographic variant of
cementite should precipitate for a given variant of ferrite.
It seems intuitively reasonable that a particle at the
transformation interface should attempt to lattice match
simultaneously with both the adjacent phases. However,
the experimental evidence quoted in support of the model
(reviewed by Honeycombe t194j) does not seem adequate.
For example, during the interphase precipitation of M23C 6
in chromium-rich steels, the carbide (which has a facecentered
cubic lattice) adopts a cube-cube orientation with
the austenite and a KS orientation with the ferrite. However,
M23C 6 in austenite always precipitates in a cubecube
orientation with austenite, even in the absence of
any ferrite. Suppose that the carbide precipitates in austenite
and that the austenite then transforms to ferrite;
the latter is likely to adopt a rational Kurdjumov-Sachs
type orientation with the austenite and, consequently, with
the M23C6, the final three-phase crystallography having
nothing to do with simultaneous lattice matching between
all three phases.
During interphase precipitation, the M23C 6 could be
completely oblivious of the ferrite, even though it may
be in contact with the phase, but the good three-phase
crystallography would nevertheless follow simply because
the M23C 6 has a cube-cube orientation with the
austenite. To test unambiguously, the theory requires a
system where the particles that form at the interphase
interface are able to adopt many different variants of an
orientation relation with the austenite. It is suggested that
interphase precipitation of MozC is an example suitable
for further work.
Given a Bagaryatski orientation relationship between
lower bainitic ferrite and its internal cementite particles,
and a KS orientation relationship between the ferrite and
austenite, it can be shown [~291 that the three-phase crystallography
expected on the basis of the lattice matching
arguments is
[10010 II [011l, II [11117
[01010 [1 [ l i i ] . H [i01]~
The experimental data for lower bainite [~:9] clearly do not
agree with these orientation relations, the cementite
"making no effort" to lattice match with the austenite.*
*Huang and Thomas t152~ have expressed the three-phase crystallography
of lower bainitic ferrite, the cementite within this ferrite, and
austenite as follows:
(100)0 II (5z~5). 5.77 deg from (101L
(o~o)o II (loi)~ II (lli).
The three-phase relationship is not, however, based on direct experimental
evidence. The angle quoted above has been corrected from the
original paper.
This conclusion remains valid even if the a/y orientation
relation turns out to be of the Nishiyama-Wasserman
type.
There is another way of verifying this conclusion.
Aaronson et al. [195] have modeled the growth of cementire
which nucleates at the a/y interface. In this model,
the penetration of the cementite into the adjacent ferrite
or austenite is determined by the rate at which either of
these phases transform into cementite. The growth of the
cementite is treated in terms of a one-dimensional
diffusion-controlled growth process. With the Zener approximation
of a linear concentration gradient in the parent
phase, the penetration of cementite in ferrite (G~) and
in austenite (G 0 are given by
G, - 0.5t-~176 ~ - c~~ ~ - c ~~ (c ~ - ~)]0.5
[6]
G v -- 0.5t ~176 - cY~ ~ - c y~ (c oy - ()]o.5
[7]
where, for example, D~ is the diffusivity of carbon in
ferrite, (is the average carbon concentration in the parent
phase (a or y), c ~0 represents the concentration of
carbon in the austenite which is in equilibrium with cementite,
and t represents the time after the nucleation
event. If it is assumed that c od or c oy are much greater
than (, c ~~ or c ~~ the ratio of growth rates is given by
GJGy = [O~ ~ - c~~176 ~ - c~~ [8]
Note that the left-hand side of this equation could be
replaced by the corresponding ratio of particle dimensions
in the two parent phases. Aaronson et al. t1951 made
the further assumption that the carbon concentrations of
the austenite and ferrite before the onset of cementite
formation are given by c ~" and c ~, respectively. This in
turn implies a number of further assumptions which are
not consistent with experimental data: that carbide formation
does not begin until the formation of all bainitic
ferrite is complete, that there is no supersaturation of
784--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
carbon in the bainitic ferrite, and that the bainite transformation
does not obey the incomplete-reaction
phenomenon.
On the basis of these assumptions, the cementite in
bainite essentially grows by drawing on the richer reservoir
of carbon in the austenite and should therefore
penetrate to a far greater extent into the austenite than
into the ferrite. Contrary to this conclusion, direct observations
prove that in the rare cases where a cementite
particle in lower bainite happens to be in contact with
the transformation interface, the cementite is confined to
the ferrite. 1t29[
Aaronson et al. t1951 also concluded that since the model
predicts that the interphase growth of cementite occurs
into both bainitic ferrite and austenite, the debate about
whether the carbides nucleate in a or ~/is irrelevant. This
is not justified because it assumes that the carbides nucleate
at the interphase interface, whereas it is likely that
the carbides which precipitate within the lower bainitic
ferrite nucleate and grow from the supersaturated bainitic
ferrite.
4. Relief of strain energy
Therefore, the evidence seems to suggest that the occurrence
of a single crystallographic variant of carbide
in lower bainite cannot be explained in terms of either
the interphase precipitation model or the lattice-invariant
shear arguments. A possible alternative explanation is
that the variant which forms is one that is best suited
toward relieving the elastic strains associated with the
austenite-to-lower bainite transformation. I1291 The observation
that carbide precipitation modifies the surface
relief of lower bainite [~96] supports this conclusion,
particularly since freshly formed plates (apparently without
carbide precipitation) exhibit perfect invariant-plane
strain relief.
5. Epsilon-carbide
The orientation relationship between e-carbide in tempered
martensite was deduced by Jack 1183'1841 as
(101),~ II (lOil)~
(2il). [I (1010)~
which also implies that
(101). ~ 1.37 deg from (1011)~
[100]. - 5 deg from [1120]~
The first reported crystallographic results for e-carbide
in lower bainite seem to be those of Lai, [~45~ who observed
that (100), tl (1120)~ and, therefore, concluded
that the orientation relationship was that found in tempered
martensite. However, although his data are consistent
with the tempered martensite orientation
relationship within the limits of experimental error, they
are incomplete since a minimum of two pairs of parallel
vectors need to be stated in order to specify the relationship
between two crystals. A more detailed study by
Huang and Thomas ~152] has subsequently confirmed that
the e-carbide found in lower bainite does indeed obey
the same orientation relationship with bainitic ferrite as
is found during the tempering of martensite.
The e-carbides are found to occur in the form of plates
which are approximately 6 to 20 nm thick and 70 to
400 nm long. t1521 The carbide/ferrite interface tends to
be ragged, but on a more macroscopic scale, single-surface
trace analysis suggests that the carbide particles grow
along (100)6 directions on {100}, habit planes, f1451
Huang and Thomas [152j concluded that the e-carbides
precipitate at the austenite/bainitic ferrite interface, on
the grounds that the observed orientation between the
bainitic ferrite and e-carbide could be generated by assuming
a KS a/y orientation and a relationship between
e-carbide and austenite in which
(111)~ II (0001)~
(li0) II (1210L
Sandvik [~15[ experimentally verified the Huang and
Thomas relations. His e-carbide formed after 30 minutes
at 380 ~ but took from 3 hours to 5 days at 320 ~ and
he suggests it forms on the interface between bainite and
small regions of austenite twins which were left untransformed
within the bainite.
6. Eta-carbide
Eta-carbide is a transition Fe2C carbide of the orthorhombic
crystal system. It is usually associated with the
tempering of martensite, [163,~64j where the martensite/
carbide orientation relationship is found to be as
follows:t163[
(110) n II {010}4
[001]n II (100).
The carbide has recently been found in lower bainitic
ferrite in the austenitic matrix of a high-silicon cast
iron, t~61,~621 where electron diffraction confirms that
[00110 II (100). I[ (0i 1)v
This information is consistent with the ~7-carbide/
martensite orientation relationship stated earlier t163j and
lends further support to the hypothesis that the carbides
within lower bainitic ferrite precipitate in a manner analogous
to the tempering of martensite.
Franetovic et al. [161'1621 also deduced, by examining the
zone axes of their diffraction patterns, that
[01010 II (012>, II (i11)~
However, the zone axes of the three superimposed patterns
could be far from parallel, and this particular set
of data is doubtful. Indeed, if the parallelisms are assumed,
then the Nishiyama-Wasserman orientation relationship
implied between the austenite and ferrite lattices
does not follow. More research is needed to establish
fully the three-phase crystallography of ,/-carbide, austenite,
and bainitic ferrite.
E. Chemical Composition of Bainitic Carbides
It has long been established, using magnetic, chemical,
and X-ray methods on extracted carbides, that the
cementite associated with upper bainite in alloy steels
has a substitutional solute content which is close to, or
slightly higher than that of the steel as a whole, even
though the cementite composition may be far from the
equilibrium composition (e.g., Reference 26). Recent
work is in broad agreement with the early data; Chance
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--785
and Ridley [~97] found that for upper bainite in an Fe-0.81C-
1.41Cr wt pct alloy, the partition coefficient, kcr, defined
as (wt pct Cr in 0)/(wt pct Cr in o0, could not be
distinguished from unity (Figure 2). Chance and Ridley
suggested that the reason why segregation is found in
pearlite but not in bainite (for the same transformation
temperature) is that there is a fast diffusion path along
the incoherent interface for pearlite.
IV. THERMODYNAMICS AND KINETICS
A. Equilibrium and Deviations from Equilibrium
Equilibrium is said to exist in a system when it reaches
a state in which no further change is perceptible, no matter
how long one waits. [t98J A bainitic microstructure is,
however, far from equilibrium. As an example, the free
energy change accompanying the formation of bainite in
an Fe-0.1C wt pct alloy at 540 ~ is --580 J/mol,
whereas that accompanying the formation of an equilibrium
mixture of allotriomorphic ferrite and austenite at
the same temperature is -- 1050 J/mol. Consequently,
the excess energy of bainite could, in this case, be said
to be -470 J/mol, or -0.04 in units of RTM, where R
is the gas constant and TM the absolute melting temperature.
This is about an order of magnitude larger than
the stored energy due to severe cold deformation of pure
metals (-0.003 RTM) but is small in comparison with
that of some highly metastable materials such as rapidly
quenched liquids which solidify as highly supersaturated
solutions -1 RTM or multilayered structures with an excess
energy of -0.1 RTM .[199J
In spite of the large deviations from equilibrium, we
shall see that the concepts of equilibrium, metastable
kcr
20
I I I
tt
bainite
-t \ --+ -+-t-+-"+1"-+"
~- I I
5OO 600 700
Transformation Temoerature'{i
Fig. 2--Partitioning coefficient of chromium between cementite and
ferrite, as a function of transformation temperatureJ ~971 For the pearlite,
the partitioning coefficients are measured in the pearlite at the
pearlite/austenite interface.
equilibrium, and constrained equilibrium can nonetheless
be useful in interpreting the mechanism and consequences
of the bainite transformation.
Equilibrium is said to exist between homogeneous
phases when the chemical potential of each component
is the same in all the phases present. It is defined by the
equation
/x~' =/x 7 [9]
for i = 1, 2, 3 . . . . where /zi is the chemical potential
of component "i." In the study of the kinetics of transformations,
the concept of equilibrium in terms of phases
which are homogeneous is rather restrictive. It is then
useful to consider equilibrium to exist locally. For example,
it is a reasonable approximation that during
diffusion-controlled transformation, the compositions of
the phases in contact at the interface are such as to allow
equilibrium to exist locally even though the phases may
not be homogeneous. As long as the phases are not too
inhomogeneous (as is the case with some artificial multilayered
structures or during spinodal decomposition)
classical equilibrium thermodynamics can be applied
locally.
As discussed earlier, during paraequilibrium transformation,
the ratio of iron to substitutional solute atoms
remains the same everywhere, but subject to that constraint,
the carbon atoms achieve equality of chemical
potential in all phases. Either the substitutional solute
atoms or the iron atoms are then said to be trapped by
the advancing transformation interface, the criterion for
trapping requiring that the chemical potential of that species
increases on transfer across the interface.
Transformation may also occur without any diffusion,
but this is thermodynamically only possible below the To
temperature, where the parent and product phases of the
same composition have equal free energy.
The concepts of local equilibrium, paraequilibrium,
and diffusionless transformation are relatively easy to
visualize and formulate and, hence, are very popular.
However, between local and paraequilibrium, there could
exist an infinite number of states in which the substitutional
elements partially partition between the phases.
Similarly, between paraequilibrium and diffusionless
transformation there can exist an infinite number of states
in which the degree of partitioning of carbon may be
different from equilibrium. On the other hand, such states
would have to be stabilized by some other rate-controlling
factor such as interface kinetics; otherwise, they should
tend to degenerate toward equilibrium, because any small
perturbation in composition at the interface, which leads
to a reduction in free energy, would tend to grow. We
shall see that the stabilization of such nonequilibrium states
is, at least in principle, feasible for solid-state transformations
in steels.
Before these concepts can be utilized in assessing the
mechanism of the bainite reaction, it is necessary to consider
additional terms which raise the free energy of the
product phase. For example, the effect of including the
stored energy terms is to change the temperature at which
composition-invariant transformation becomes thermodynamically
possible from To to To'.
786--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
B. Stored Energy Due to Transformation
Much of the stored energy of bainite comes from the
strain energy due to the invariant-plane strain shape change
accompanying transformation. If the shape of a platelet
of bainite is approximated as that of an oblate ellipsoid
of semi-axes R, R and y, with R >> y, then Christian [2~176
has shown that the molar strain energy, Gs, which is a
consequence of the shape change, is given by
Gs = [tZVm/(1 -- V)] {(2/9) (1 + v)A 2 + (7ry/4R)~ 2
+ ((1 - v)Try/3R)A~}
+ 0.5/xVm[(2- v)~ry/4(1 - v)Rls 2 [10]
where/x and v are the shear modulus and Poisson' s ratio,
respectively, of the matrix austenite, Vm is the molar volume
of the austenite, A is the uniform dilatation accompanying
transformation, ~ is the additional uniaxial
dilatation normal to the habit plane, and s is the shear
component of the shape change. Although the A term
has in the past been used to explain the crystallography
of bainite, direct measurements of the shape change have
not revealed any significant uniform dilatation. Calculations
indicate a strain energy term due to the shape
change is about 400 J/mol for bainite, t591 this being smaller
than the corresponding term for martensite, which is about
600 J/mol. t2~ The smaller value for bainite is because
the aspect ratio (y/R) for bainite platelets is usually found
to be considerably smaller than that for martensite. The
shear and dilatational components of the shape change
are, in fact, rather similar for martensite and bainite.
There are some complications in using Eq. [10] for
the bainite transformation. Bainite platelets do not form
in isolation, but grow in sheaves which themselves have
a platelike morphology on a macroscopic scale; the shear
component of the shape change as averaged over the whole
sheaf is much smaller than that of an individual platelet.
[56'57'65'128] The effect of such three-dimensional formations
of platelets on the stored energy term has not
been investigated. Bainite forms at relatively high temperature
s where both the austenite and ferrite have low
yield strengths. Consequently, the strain energy due to
the shape change can be reduced by plastic relaxation.
The plastic deformation causes an increase in dislocation
density, but since it is driven by the shape change, the
strain energy calculated on the basis of an elastically accommodated
shape change should be an upper limit. I2~
Another complication, which should lead to a reduction
in stored energy per unit volume as transformation proceeds,
is that new sheaves may grow adjacent to those
already existing in a mutually accommodating manner.
As the transformation proceeds, carbides grow either from
austenite or from the bainitic ferrite; these may grow in
such a way as to anneal the transformation strains.
In martensitic reactions, transformation twinning can
contribute -100 J-/mol of stored energy; t2~ this term does
not arise for bainite where the lattice-invariant shear is
always found to be slip. Also, the contribution from the
bainite/austenite interface is very small during the growth
stage. [59]
C. Thermodynamics of Growth
Atom-probe experiments, which reveal directly the
absence of any substitutional alloying element partitioning
at the bainitic ferrite/austenite interface, even on the
finest conceivable scale, prove that the growth of bainite
in alloy steels cannot be treated in terms of local equilibrium
or of any intermediate state between local and
paraequilibrium. The atom probe experiments have now
been carded out for a wide range of steels, and it is established
that Mn, Ni, Si, Cr, and Mo do not redistribute
during transformation. ~89-93J
It remains to consider the role of carbon in the growth
of bainite. This is difficult to resolve directly because if
the bainite is supersaturated during growth, the relatively
high temperatures at which it grows provide an opportunity
for much of the excess carbon to diffuse rapidly
into the residual austenite before any experimental measurements
can be conducted. The time involved may
typically be less than a second; t2~ of course, the time
does increase as the temperature is reduced but the excess
carbon can then precipitate in the form of carbides
within the bainitic ferrite. If attempts are made to drastically
reduce the transformation temperature by alloying,
then bainite ceases to form, leaving martensite as
the only displacive transformation product of austenite.[2~
However, there are indirect methods of determining
the carbon concentration of bainitic ferrite during growth.
If bainitic ferrite initially has the same composition as
the parent austenite, the transformation should in principle
go to completion since there is no diffusion necessary.
In practice, the whole of the austenite grain does
not transform instantaneously because of kinetic restrictions
(e.g., heterogeneous nucleation and the fact that
the plates reach a limiting size); even if the first plate of
bainite forms without any diffusion, it has an opportunity
to reject its excess carbon into the remaining austenite
during the progress of the reaction as a whole.
This is a reflection of the fact that at the temperatures
where bainite typically forms, the time required for partitioning
is not large when compared with that for the
reaction to terminate. Because the austenite becomes enriched
with carbon, a stage is eventually reached when
it is thermodynamically impossible for further bainite to
form by diffusionless transformation. At this point, the
composition of the austenite is given by the T'o curve of
the phase diagram. If the alternative hypothesis is that
paraequilibrium exists during all stages of transformation,
then the reaction would stop when the carbon concentration
of the austenite is given by the Ae3" curve.
The Ae3' curve is the (a + y)/y paraequilibrium phase
boundary, and the Ae3" curve is obtained when this is
modified to account for the stored energy of transformation.
The reaction is experimentally found to stop when
the average carbon concentration of the austenite is close
to the T'o curve rather than the Ae3" boundary. The experimental
evidence has been reviewed by Christian and
Edmonds I241 and is based on dilatometry, lattice imaging,
and atom-probe techniques.
Therefore, the reaction remains incomplete in the sense
that there is no equilibrium between the austenite and
ferrite and that the volume fraction of bainitic ferrite does
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--787
not satisfy the lever rule. Note that the difference in carbon
concentrations between the T" and Ae3" curves at
the temperatures where bainite typically forms is very
large, so that the experiments mentioned above are a
sensitive indication of the failure of the transformation
to reach paraequilibrium. This "incomplete-reaction
phenomenon" explains immediately why the degree of
transformation to bainite is zero at the Bs temperature
and increases with undercooling below Bs in steels where
other reactions do not overlap with the formation of
bainitic ferrite; the T" curve has a negative slope on a
temperature/carbon concentration plot, so that the austenite
can tolerate more carbon before diffusionless
transformation becomes possible as the temperature is
reduced.
The incomplete-reaction phenomenon supports the hypothesis
that the growth of bainitic ferrite occurs without
any diffusion, with carbon being subsequently partitioned
into the residual austenite. There is as yet no reasonable
alternative explanation of this phenomenon.
Consider now the possibility that the ferrite during
growth is only partially supersaturated with carbon. The
driving force available for transformation can be partitioned
into that dissipated in the diffusion of carbon ahead
of the interface and a quantity dissipated in the transfer
of atoms across the interface. Each of these dissipation
terms can, with an appropriate model, be related to interface
velocity functions, one being the diffusion velocity
and the other a velocity determined by the mobility of
the interface. The intersection of these functions gives
an actual solution of the interfacial velocity. By imposing
different levels of supersaturation in the ferrite, a
series of solutions can be calculated as a function of
supersaturation. Some criterion (e.g., maximum velocity)
can then be used to select the most likely solution
and, hence, the most likely supersaturation. In this way,
it has been shown, I2~176 using what seems to be a realistic
model of the interface, that growth involving partial
supersaturation can be stable, as pointed out by
Christian and Edmonds. Using different physical principles,
the same conclusion has also been reached by
Hillert.t206~
Nonetheless, there remain numerous difficulties with
the concept of growth with partial supersaturation in the
context of bainite in steels. The models all predict that
the degree of supersaturation rises with undercooling; this
is inconsistent with the fact that the bainite reaction stops
when the carbon concentration of the residual austenite
approaches the To curve. At first sight, the consequence
of increasing supersaturation with undercooling would
be to change the terminal carbon concentration of the
austenite from the Ae3" down to T" at full supersaturation
as the transformation temperature is reduced. On the other
hand, for a given transformation temperature, one might
expect the level of supersaturation to decrease as the
transformation progresses (since the austenite becomes
enriched in carbon), so that the terminal carbon concentration
may then always be given by the Ae3", irrespective
of transformation temperature.
A further difficulty is that at a given transformation
temperature, it is predicted that for growth involving
partial supersaturation, the terminal carbon concentration
of the austenite cannot be less than a value xmv , where
x~ is determined by the tangent to the austenite free energy
curve, the tangent being chosen such that it intersects
the ferrite free energy curve at the average alloy
carbon concentration, ,,?. This is again inconsistent with
experimental measurements, t89'9~
It is pertinent to note that the models for growth
involving partial supersaturation are not as yet fully developed.
They do not, for example, take account of stored
energy or plate aspect ratio variations as a function of
temperature, nor do they predict the stifling of the growth
of individual platelets of bainite.
If partial supersaturation is not possible, then some
explanation is needed as to why there is an abrupt transition
from paraequilibrium growth for Widmanstiitten
ferrite and diffusionless growth for bainite. We propose
that an abrupt transition may be expected if, in addition
to the requirement that diffusionless transformation is only
permitted below To, it is also necessary to consider the
relative kinetics of interface motion and of the partitioning
of carbon from the supersaturated ferrite behind the
advancing interface into the residual austenite. If the kinetics
of the latter process are comparable to the rate at
which the interface advances, then the diffusion fields
of the two phenomenologically different processes must
overlap, and growth should tend to reduce toward equilibrium
partitioning. This is a distinct possibility at high
temperatures (still below To) because the decarburization
of ferrite is then very rapid, t2~ It is necessary to construct
a model of plate growth which accounts for diffusion
processes which begin immediately behind the
transformation interface to consider this problem in detail.
It provides, for the moment, a possible explanation
for a relatively abrupt transition from paraequilibrium
growth of Widmanstatten ferrite to the diffusionless growth
of bainite.
D. Thermodynamics of Nucleation
It is an experimental fact that the rate at which the Ws
or B~ temperature decreases as a function of alloy chemistry
is larger than the corresponding change in the Ae3
temperature. This problem has been investigated by
Bhadeshia t2~ using data from TTT diagrams. Although
there is much fine detail in such diagrams, they essentially
consist of two C curves. The one at lower temperatures
has a flat top and represents the formation of
Widmanst~itten ferrite and bainite.* By analyzing the
*In steels where the transformation kinetics are very rapid, the curves
overlap to such an extent that the Tqq" diagram appears to contain
just one C curve.
driving force available at the highest temperature, Th,
where bainite or Widmanstiitten ferrite form at a detectable
rate as a function of alloy chemistry, it can be deduced
that both of these transformation products nucleate
by the same mechanism and that the formation of the
nucleus involves the equilibrium partitioning of carbon.
Interestingly, the driving force necessary to obtain a detectable
rate of nucleation was found to decrease linearly
as a function of Th. This behavior is consistent with the
theory for martensite nucleation, in which the activation
energy is proportional to driving force, t2~ whereas classical
nucleation theory predicts an inx~erse square
788--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
relationship. The implication is that the nucleation process
for bainite and Widmanst~itten ferrite is like martensite,
displacive in character, but, unlike martensitic
nucleation which is diffusionless, there is equilibrium
partitioning of carbon during the formation of the nucleus.
Furthermore, the theory predicts, as observed experimentally,
that a larger driving force is needed to
achieve a given nucleation rate if the transformation temperature
is depressed by alloying. This clearly is consistent
with the fact that the effect of alloying in depressing
the Bs and Ws temperatures is greater than on the Ae3
temperature.
If at Th the available driving force is insufficient to
sustain the diffusionless growth of bainite, then Th = Ws.
A further undercooling is then necessary before the Bs
temperature is reached. On the other hand, if sufficient
driving force is available at Th to account for both diffusionless
transformation and the stored energy of bainite,
then Widmanst/itten ferrite does not form in the steel
concerned. Similarly, very heavy alloying can make both
the Widmanst~itten ferrite and bainite reactions to be absent,
since the temperature is then sufficiently low to
permit directly the diffusionless nucleation and growth
of the kinetically favored martensite. These concepts explain
why all three transformations do not necessarily
occur in all steels.
E. Growth Rate
1. Growth rate of sheaves of bainite
Sheaves of bainite normally nucleate at austenite grain
boundaries and propagate toward the grain interiors by
the nucleation and growth of individual subunits. New
subunits nucleate near the tips of previous subunits; the
nucleation of subunits in adjacent positions occurs at a
much lower rate. This means that the sheaf itself has on
a macroscopic scale a platelike morphology in three dimensions.
Since coordinated movements of atoms cannot
in general be sustained across austenite grain
boundaries, the growth of a given sheaf is confmed strictly
to a single austenite grain. Bainite plates are also stopped
by austenite twin boundaries, t4~ The grain in which
bainite grows is the one with which it has an orientation
within the Bain region as previously defined; this contrasts
with the Smith TM theory of grain-boundary nucleation
for reconstructive transformations, which states that
the new phase will grow into the grain with which it has
a random (incoherent boundary) orientation.
Most direct observations of bainite growth are of limited
resolution and refer to the growth of sheaves of
bainite. Typical thicknesses of "plates" of bainite observed
in such studies (e.g., Reference 65) are in the
range of 1 to 5/xm, far greater than that of a subunit,
as observed using TEM, which is -0.2/xm. In the discussion
that follows, observations using light microscopy
are interpreted as referring to sheaf growth, even
though the original papers may not make any explicit
distinction between sheaf and subunit.
Several direct observations have shown that the
lengthening of bainite sheaves occurs at a constant
rate. [67,2~176 For a given transformation temperature, the
measured rates are found to exhibit a significant degree
of scatter, attributed to small variations in growth rate
in radial directions within the habit plane of a given sheaf,
giving rise to a noncircular habit plane. An increase in
carbon, nickel, or chromium concentration leads to a decrease
in the lengthening rate. From measurements of
the thickening rates of sheaves, Speich and Cohen t2~
concluded that the aspect ratio (thickness/length) was independent
of sheaf size, the thickening rate being proportional
to the lengthening rate, and similar results have
been reported by Hawkins and Barford. t671 This does not
imply that the thickening and lengthening processes for
sheaves are coupled, because thickening was found to
continue at the same rate, even when lengthening
stopped.*
*These I67,2~ and other observations have originally been interpreted
to refer to the growth of individual bainite plates rather than
sheaves. Speich considered that the thickening process involves the
planar motion of the broad face of the plate at a rate controlled by
the diffusion of carbon in the austenite, and the observed constant
thickening rate was then explained by the periodic precipitation of
carbides such that the effective diffusion distance for carbon remained
approximately constant. The observations really refer to sheaf growth,
the rate of thickening depending perhaps on the nucleation of other
adjacent subunits.
The ratio of the thickening to lengthening rate (when
these are independent of time) determines the aspect ratio
of a sheaf whose growth has not been limited by impingement
with obstacles such as grain boundaries. The
activation energy, Q, of a growth process may be defined
as 12~
Q = -R[d(ln {G})/d(1/T)] [1 1]
This phenomenological relation makes no specific assumptions
about the temperature dependence of growth
rate, so that the activation energy, Q, cannot be physically
interpreted without further justification. The activation
energy for lengthening is found to be smaller than
that for thickening, so that the aspect ratio of a sheaf is
expected to decrease with temperature, as confirmed experimentally.
There is, however, no satisfactory theoretical
treatment of the kinetics of sheaf thickening, and
it is also not established that the rate of thickening is
constant, as claimed by Speich and Cohen t2~ and
Speich. t651 Goodenow and Hehemann t2~~ found that the
thickening rate decreases with increasing thickness.
A recent critical assessment of the data for the lengthening
of plates of Widmans~tten ferrite and sheaves of
bainite in plain carbon steels demonstrates that for bainite,
the measured sheaf growth rates are much higher
than would be indicated by carbon diffusion-controlled
growth. ~2~
2. Growth rate of individual subunits of bainite
The lengthening rate of individual subunits of bainite
is undoubtedly far less than the speed of sound in the
metal (martensite growth velocity is often limited by this).
While the shape change accompanying transformation
indicates that the bainite/austenite interface is glissile,
the rate at which the interface moves is relatively slow,
especially if it is accepted that the growth is diffusionless.
Goodenow and Hehemann t2~~ suggested that the slow
growth of bainite is associated with the damping of interface
dislocation motion at the high temperatures at which
bainite forms. There may also be a dissipation of energy
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--789
associated with the movement of carbon atoms in compliance
with the interface stress field.
The growth rate of individual subunits of bainite has
been measured for an Fe-Mn-Si-C alloy using hot-stage
photoemission electron microscopy, and it is found that
the subunits lengthen at rates which are orders of magnitude
faster than would be expected from carbon
diffusion-controlled growth. [2121
3. Partitioning of carbon from supersaturated
bainitic ferrite
If bainitic ferrite grows with a nonequilibrium concentration
of carbon, then, given the opportunity, the
carbon should tend to partition into the residual austenite
where it has a lower chemical potential.*
*The tendency for excess carbon to redistribute into the residual
austenite should also exist for martensitic transformations in steels.
However, these transformations occur at a relatively low temperature,
where the time taken to redistribute the carbon is large compared with
the time taken to transform most of the austenite. Consequently, the
redistribution process does not hinder the progress of martensitic
transformation.
The time, td, required to decarburize the supersaturated
ferrite is intuitively expected at least to be comparable
to that required for a subunit to complete its
growth. If td is small compared with the kinetics of carbide
precipitation from ferrite, then the transformation
would be classified as upper rather than lower bainite.
Kinsman and Aaronson t2131 considered the kinetics of
the partitioning of carbon from bainitic ferrite of the same
composition as the parent phase. For a plate thickness
w, it is reasonably assumed that the flux of carbon is
one-dimensional along a coordinate z normal to the
a/7 interface, with origin at the interface and z being
positive in the austenite. A more recent version of the
calculation t2~ begins with the conservation condition:
(0"5w)(s [X~{Z, td}--Y,]dz [12]
where ta is the time taken for the ferrite composition to
become uniform at its paraequilibrium value, Y is the
average mole fraction of carbon in the alloy, and x ~r and
x r" are the paraequilibrium carbon concentrations in a
and y, respectively.* Since the diffusion rate of carbon
*These equilibrium concentrations should strictly allow for the stored
energy of bainitic ferrite.
in austenite is slower than in ferrite, the rate of decarburization
will be determined by the diffusivity in the
austenite, and the concentration of carbon in austenite at
the interface remains constant for times 0 < t < td, after
which it steadily decreases as the austenite becomes homogeneous
in composition. The function xv is given by
x~ = .~ + (x TM - ~?) erfc {z/2(Dtd) ~ } [13]
Kinsman and Aaronson evaluated the concentrationdependent
diffusivity, D{x}, of carbon in austenite at
x = x ~, but it should be a better approximation to take
it to be a weighted average diffusivity,/). On integrating
Eq. [13], we get
t ~ = w(Y- x~)Tr~176 ~ - ~) [14]
Note also that by substituting different levels of starting
carbon concentrations in the ferrite, the time dependence
of the average ferrite concentration can also be determined.
Kinsman and Aaronson's original estimate was
td = 3 ms at 540 ~ for platelets with a delay time between
successive nucleation events of about 10 seconds.
The variation of td with temperature is shown in Figure 3.
V. REVERSE TRANSFORMATION
FROM BAINITE TO AUSTENITE
There has been little work reported on the mechanism
or kinetics of the reverse transformation of bainite into
austenite, probably because for wrought steels, there is
no industrial demand for a knowledge of this process.
As a consequence of research on the modeling of microstructures
in multirun weld deposits, where the successive
deposition of hot layers of weld metal causes some
of the underlying metal to reaustenitize, there is now
considerable interest in a quantitative description of the
kinetics of reaustenitization from bainite.
Reaustenitization from Austenite and Upper
Bainitic Ferrite
When an iron-carbon alloy is heated to a temperature
within the a + y phase field until equilibrium is established
between allotriomorphic ferrite and austenite, a
small rise or fall in temperature leads to the growth or
dissolution, respectively, of the austenite until the volume
fractions once again satisfy the lever rule. [2141 The
transformation of austenite into allotriomorphic ferrite
Fe- n-2Si-O. 3C wt %
20
I/I
.b
3O0
transformation femperalure T.
Fig. 3--Diagram illustrating how the time required to decarburize a
plate of bainite in an Fe-0.43C-3Mn-2Si wt pct alloy varies with
temperature.
790--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
is, in this sense, reversible, and exhibits little or no hysteresis.
On the other hand, for martensite in steels, there
is a large difference between the Ms and the austenitestart
temperature (As) recorded during heating. This is
because the martensite tempers (or autotempers) and because
its formation does some work in the form of irreversible
plastic deformation.
If carbides precipitate from the austenite during the
bainite reaction, then a considerable hysteresis is expected
during reverse transformation which would require
the renucleation of austenite. On the other hand,
a large hysteresis effect is not expected if reverse transformation
begins from an equilibrium mixture of just
bainitic ferrite and austenite. Of course, if the bainite
forms by diffusionless transformation and the excess carbon
is rejected into the residual austenite subsequent to
transformation, then the reaction would cease before an
equilibrium mixture of ferrite and austenite is reached,
so that an increase in temperature would not lead to an
immediate reversal of transformation.
The problem can be studied best in steels which transform
to bainite without any precipitation of carbides. In
these circumstances, the microstructure obtained by isothermal
transformation below Bs is a mixture of bainitic
ferrite and carbon-enriched residual austenite. To study
the reverse transformation, the mixture can be heated to
an isothermal reaustenitization temperature, so that the
nucleation of austenite is unnecessary. Experiments like
these have shown that the reaustenitization occurs by a
diffusional process and have established clearly that there
is indeed a large difference between the Bs and As temperatures.
This is in spite of the fact that the starting
microstructure exists in a metastable a + y phase field.
Furthermore, the As temperature is found to correspond
approximately to the Ae3 temperature of the residual
austenite. The degree of reaustenitization increases from
zero at the As temperature to 100 pct at the austenitefinish,
or A/, temperature, which is the Ae3 temperature
of the alloy as a whole. If bainite was simply the product
of equilibrium or paraequilibrium transformation, then,
like allotriomorphic ferrite, a rise in temperature above
the isothermal transformation temperature should lead to
a reversal of reaction with little hysteresis.
The observed reaustenitization behavior can be understood
as follows. [177,2151 In steels where carbide precipitation
from austenite is relatively sluggish, the formation
of bainite ceases prematurely during isothermal transformation
at a temperature To. The stage at which reaction
stops is when the carbon content of the residual
austenite reaches the To' curve of the phase diagram
(Figure 4). It follows that the carbon concentration, x~,
of the austenite when the formation of acicular ferrite
ceases at T~ is given by
t x v Xr;{Ti} [15]
as indicated by the point "a" in Figure 4. Furthermore,
we note that
x' z, ~ XAe3{T~} [ 161
where XAe3{Ti} is marked "b" in Figure 4.
Thus, although the formation of bainite ceases at Ti,
because the carbon content of austenite is far less than
800
d
700 i c ~ 600
~ 500 ia b
/.00
, , ,
o.o o.o o.o o.o, o.o o.,o o.,,
MOLE FRACTION OF CARBON
Fig. 4--Phase diagram showing the Ae3, Ae3', and T" curves for an
Fe-0.27Si-l.84Mn-2.48Ni-0.20Mo wt pct alloy.
the equilibrium concentration (i.e., x' v ~ xae3{Ti}), the net
free energy change for further formation of ferrite by a
mechanism which includes carbon diffusion is still
negative.
This remains the case until the temperature, T, is high
enough (i.e., T = As) to satisfy the equation
Xry = Xae3{As} [171
Hence, reaustenitization will first occur at a temperature
As, as indicated by the point "c" in Figure 4, and
as observed experimentally. This is a consequence of the
mechanism of the bainite reaction, which does not allow
the transformation to reach completion. If this were not
the case, then the lever rule demands that the temperature
need only be raised infinitesimally above Ti in order
for the reverse a ~ y transformation to be thermodynamically
possible.
The theory predicts that at any temperature Tv greater
than As, the ab ~ y transformation should cease as soon
as the residual austenite carbon concentration (initially
x'r) reaches the Ae3 curve, i.e., when
Xy : XAe3{Ty } [18]
The equilibrium volume fraction of austenite at the temperature
T v is then given by
Vv{Tr} = -~/XAe3{Ty } [19]
assuming that the carbon concentration of ferrite is negligible
and that XAe3{Zy } > .,~. When XAe3{Zy } = .~, the
alloy eventually becomes fully austenitic (point "d" in
Figure 4), and if this condition is satisfied at Tv = Ay,
then, for all T v > A/, the alloy transforms completely to
austenite.
This model explains why the degree of ab ~ y transformation
increases from approximately zero at As (the
Ae3 temperature of the residual austenite) to 100 pct at
A/(the Ae3 temperature of the alloy as a whole). The
behavior is a direct reflection of the fact that the composition
of the residual austenite after the bainite reaction
has ceased is far below equilibrium. This in turn
provides further support for the incomplete reaction phenomenon
and its implication that the growth of bainite
occurs without any diffusion. Finally, it should be noted
that the model discussed above assumes that the carbon
concentrations of both phases are uniform at all stages.
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--791
VI. ACICULAR FERRITE
"Acicular ferrite" (aa) is a phase most commonly observed
in the transformation of austenite during cooling
of low-alloy steel weld deposits (see, for example, the
recent reviews by Grong and Matlock 12161 and Abson and
Pargeter. 12171) It is of considerable commercial importance
because it provides a relatively tough and strong
microstructure. It forms in a temperature range where
reconstructive transformations become relatively sluggish.
The term acicular means shaped and pointed like a
needle, but it is generally recognized that aa has in three
dimensions the morphology of~ thin, lenticular plates
(Figure 5). The true aspect ratio of such plates has never
been measured, but in random planar sections, the plates
are typically about 10/~m long and -1/~m wide, so
that the true aspect ratio is likely to be much smaller
than 0.1.
In fusion welding processes involving steels, the use
of strong deoxidizing elements such as silicon, aluminum,
and titanium, together with protective slag-forming
compounds, causes the entrapment of complex multiphase
nonmetallic inclusions in the solid at the advancing
&ferrite/liquid interface. The inclusions may be oxides
or other compounds but they can, under some circumstances,
influence the subsequent development of microstructure
during cooling of the weld deposit. Acicular
ferrite plates, during the early stages of transformation,
nucleate on inclusions present in the large columnar austenite
grains which are typical of weld deposits. 12181 Subsequent
plates may nucleate autocatalytically, so that a
one-to-one correspondence between the number of active
inclusions and the number of a~ plates is not
expected. [2191
The shape change accompanying the formation of a~
has been characterized qualitatively as an invariant-plane
strain; other measurements imply that the stored energy
of acicular ferrite is -400 J/mol. 1177'220,2211 Consistent with
the observed surface relief effect, microanalysis experiments
indicate that there is no bulk partitioning of substitutional
alloying elements during the formation of
acicular ferrite, c22~ However, work of a higher spatial
Fig. 5--A transmission electron micrograph illustrating the morphology
of acicular ferrite in a steel weld deposit.
and chemical resolution is needed to verity the absence
of local effects near the transformation interface.
Plates of a~ have never been found to cross austenite
grain boundaries, and the orientation relationship between
aa and the y grain in which it grows is always in
the Bain regionY 22~
The acicular ferrite transformation obeys the incompletereaction
phenomenon, the degree of reaction tending to
zero as the transformation temperature rises toward the
B+ temperature; at a given temperature, the transformation
stops as xr reaches the To' curve. The evidence all
indicates that the growth of acicular ferrite is diffusionless,
with carbon partitioning into austenite after the
transformation event.
The experimental data to date indicate that acicular
ferrite is essentially identical to bainite. Its detailed morphology
differs from that of conventional bainite because
the former nucleates intragranularly at inclusions
within large y grains, whereas in wrought steels which
are relatively free of nonmetallic inclusions, bainite nucleates
initially at Y/Y grain surfaces and continues growth
by the repeated formation of subunits'to generate the
classical sheaf morphology. Acicular ferrite does not
normally grow in sheaves because the development of
sheaves is stifled by hard impingement between plates
nucleated independently at adjacent sites. Indeed, conventional
bainite or acicular ferrite can be obtained under
identical isothermal transformation conditions in the same
(inclusion-rich) steel; in the former case, the austenite
grain size has to be small in order that nucleation from
grain surfaces dominates and subsequent growth then
swamps the interiors of the y grains. For a larger y grain
size, intragranular nucleation on inclusions dominates,
so that a~ is obtained. Hence, the reason why a~ is not
usually obtained in wrought steels is because they are
relatively free of inclusions and because most commercial
heat treatments aim at a small austenite grain size.
Acicular ferrite is sometimes considered to be intragranularly
nucleated Widmanstatten ferrite 12~91 on the basis
of the observation of "steps" at the transformation interface,
which are taken to imply a ledge growth mechanism.
This kind of evidence is, however, tenuous in the
sense that a step mechanism is a mechanism for interface
motion and carries no implication about the mechanism
of transformation. Furthermore, the observations themselves
are weak in the sense that perturbations of various
kinds can always be seen on transformation interfaces
between ferrite and austenite. Such perturbations do not,
however, necessarily imply a step mechanism of growth.
Evidence that the residual austenite is enriched in carbon
is also quoted in support of the contention that a~ is
Widmanst~itten ferrite, 1219J but, as pointed out above, the
enrichment can occur during or after the transformation
event.
Referring again to the nucleation of acicular ferrite, it
is established theoretically 12191 that inclusions are less effective
in nucleating ferrite when compared with austenite
grain surfaces, and experiments confirm this since
ferrite formation first begins at the austenite grain
boundaries. However, because of the complexity of the
inclusions and the difficulty in conducting controlled experiments
with welds, the nucleation potency of inclusions
is not clearly understood. A popular idea is that
792--VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990 METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A
those inclusions which show the best "lattice matching"
with ferrite are most effective in nucleating the ferrite,
and it has even been suggested I2~2~ that there may exist
reproducible orientation relationships between inclusions
and the ferrite plates that they nucleate. Experiments,
however, demonstrate the absence of a reproducible
ferrite/inclusion orientation relationship. ~2~3~ The fact that
the inclusions, which form in the liquid steel, are randomly
oriented in space, and that the orientation
relationship of acicular ferrite with the parent austenite
is always found to be of the KS/NW type, necessarily
implies that the inclusion/ferrite orientation relation also
has to be random. Other ways in which inclusions may
assist the formation of acicular ferrite include stimulation
by thermal strains and chemical heterogeneities in
the vicinity of the inclusion/matrix interface; also, the
inclusions may simply act as inert 'sites for heterogeneous
nucleation, t~4] Chemical reactions are also possible
at the inclusion/matrix interface, t2~
VII. CONCLUSIONS
A. Key Characteristics of Transformations in Steels
The table below t2~ indicates the key characteristics of
phase transformations in steels; it may be regarded as a
working hypothesis which seems most consistent with
the available experimental data. The nomenclature used
for the transformation products is as follows: martensite
(~'), lower bainite (~tb), upper bainite (suD, acicular ferrite
(o~a), Widmanstatten ferrite (O~w), allotriomorphic ferrite
(~), idiomorphic ferrite (ai), pearlite (P), and
substitutional alloying elements (X). Consistency of a
comment with the transformation concerned is indicated
by (=) and inconsistency by (#); cases where the comment
is only sometimes consistent with the transformation
are indicated by (| The term parent 3~ implies the
3, grain in which the product phase grows. Note that it
is not justified to distinguish massive ferrite from a.
B. Notes
Nucleation and growth reactions are of first order in
the Ehrenfest classification; in all such reactions, the parent
and product phases can coexist and are separated by welldefined
interfaces. Martensitic transformations, because
they can be very rapid in steels, are sometimes incorrectly
stated not to involve a nucleation and growth
process.
It is significant that all of the ferrite crystals which
grow in the form of plates have an invariant-plane shape
change with an appreciable shear component accompanying
transformation. Pearlitic ferrite does not have a
plate morphology, since, within an apparently lamellar
colony, the ferrite regions are all interconnected in space.
Reconstructive diffusion is the flow of matter necessary
during reconstructive transformation in order to ensure
the absence of the sort of shape deformations which
accompany the formation of martensite. A reconstructive
transformation may be regarded as a combination of
a lattice change and a recrystallization of the product
phase, reconstructive diffusion being the flow necessary
for the recrystallization process.
In diffusionless transformations, it is possible to specify
(in a localized region at least) how particular vectors,
planes, and unit cells of one structure (defined by an
Comment a r Ollb Olub Ol a Ol w Ol Ol i P
Nucleation and growth reaction . . . .
Plate morphology . . . .
IPS shape change with shear component . . . .
Diffusionless nucleation = # #
Only carbon diffuses during nucleation # = = =
Reconstructive diffusion during nucleation # # #
Often nucleates intragranularly on defects = # # =
Diffusionless growth . . . .
Reconstructive diffusion during growth # # #
Atomic correspondence (all atoms) during growth . . . .
Atomic correspondence, during growth,
for atoms in substitutional sites = = =
Bulk redistribution of X atoms during growth # # #
Local equilibrium at interface during growth # # #
Local paraequilibrium at interface during growth # #
Diffusion of carbon during transformation # # #
Carbon diffusion-controlled growth # # #
Cooperative growth of ferrite and cementite # # #
High dislocation density = = =
Incomplete-reaction phenomenon # = =
Necessarily has a glissile interface = = =
Always has an orientation within the Bain region = = =
Grows across austenite grain boundaries # # #
High interface mobility at low temperatures = = =
Displacive transformation mechanism = = =
Reconstructive transformation mechanism # # #
#
#
#
#
#
#
z
z
#
z
#
= # #
= # #
= # #
# =
= # #
# | | |
# | | |
= | |
= | | |
# # =
| # # #
= # ~ #
= # #
= # # :#
METALLURGICAL TRANSACTIONS A VOLUME 21A, APRIL 1990--793
imaginary labeling of the individual atoms) are derived
from corresponding vectors, planes, and unit cells of the
other structure. This is termed a lattice correspondence
and it defines a pure lattice deformation which carries
the original lattice points, or some fraction of these points,
into points of the new lattice. When interstitial atoms are
present, they may move over large distances during
transformation without affecting the lattice correspondence;
this is sometimes loosely expressed by stating that
there is an atomic correspondence for the solvent and
substitutional solute atoms but not for the interstitial atoms.
A further relaxation of the condition is to allow the solvent
and substitutional solute atoms to be displaced during
transformation among the sites specified by the lattice
correspondence, but not to create new sites or to destroy
any specified sites; in this way the lattice correspondence
is preserved but there is no longer an atomic correspondence.
Note that in the classification presented above,
the single atomic jumps of interstitial atoms needed
to destroy Zener ordering (which is produced automatically
by the Bain correspondence) are not taken into
account.
Even though two crystals may have an identical bulk
composition, it may not be concluded that their com-
_positions at the transformation interface are identical.
There are modes of transformation (e.g., negligible partitioning
local equilibrium) where the bulk compositions
are predicted to be identical, but, in the vicinity of the
transformation interface, the two phases differ in
composition.
For plain carbon steels, there is no difference between
equilibrium and paraequilibrium.
The incomplete-reaction phenomenon implies that
when a reaction can be studied in isolation, it stops before
the phases reach their equilibrium or paraequilibrium
compositions when stored energy terms have been accounted
for.
An orientation within the Bain region means a reproducible
relation which may be irrational but is close to
the rational NW or KS relation.
Massive ferrite is not classified as a separate morphology
since it can be included within allotriomorphic
or idiomorphic ferrite.
